                                       BIM Handbook
                             A Guide to Building Information
                             Modeling for Owners, Managers,
                           Designers, Engineers, and Contractors


                                                 Chuck Eastman
                                                  Paul Teicholz
                                                  Rafael Sacks
                                                 Kathleen Liston




                                                              John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.




ffirs.indd i                                                                                                                       1/3/08 12:32:13 PM
                This book is printed on acid-free paper. ⬁

                Copyright © 2008 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved

                Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
                Published simultaneously in Canada

                No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
                form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
                except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
                either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
                appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
                01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests
                to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley
                & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or
                online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.

                Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have used their
                best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to
                the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied
                warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
                extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
                herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
                appropriate. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
                other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
                or other damages.

                For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer
                Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317)
                572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.

                Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
                print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley products, visit
                our web site at www.wiley.com.

                Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
                BIM handbook : a guide to building information modeling for owners, managers, designers,
                engineers, and contractors / Chuck Eastman . . . [et al.].
                       p. cm.
                  Includes bibliographical references and index.
                  ISBN: 978-0-470-18528-5 (cloth)
                  1. Building—Data processing—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Building management—Data
                processing—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Communication in the building trades—Handbooks,
                manuals, etc. 4. Architectural practice—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 5. Architects and
                builders—Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Eastman, Charles M.
                  TH437.B53 2008
                  690.0285—dc22
                                                                                                2007029306

                Printed in the United States of America

                10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1




ffirs.indd ii                                                                                                   1/3/08 12:32:14 PM
                Contents

                            Preface                                          vii
                            Foreword                                          xi


                CHAPTER 1   BIM Handbook Introduction                         1
                            1.0 Executive Summary                             1
                            1.1 Introduction                                  1
                            1.2 The Current AEC Business Model                2
                            1.3 Documented Inefficiencies of
                                Traditional Approaches                        8
                            1.4 BIM: New Tools and New Processes             12
                            1.5 What Is Not BIM Technology                   15
                            1.6 What Are the Benefits of BIM?
                                What Problems Does It Address?               16
                            1.7 What Challenges Can Be Expected?             21
                            1.8 Future of Designing and Building with BIM
                                (Chapter 8)                                  23
                            1.9 Case Studies (Chapter 9)                     24

                CHAPTER 2   BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling                25
                            2.0 Executive Summary                            25
                            2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology      26
                            2.2 Varied Capabilities of Parametric Modelers   44
                            2.3 Overview of the Major BIM Model
                                Generating Systems                           54
                            2.4 Conclusion                                   63

                CHAPTER 3   Interoperability                                 65
                            3.0 Executive Summary                            65
                            3.1 Introduction                                 66
                            3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats          67
                            3.3 Background of Product Data Models            70
                            3.4 XML Schemas                                  84


                                                                                      iii



ftoc.indd iii                                                                      1/16/08 11:32:11 AM
               iv Contents

                                         3.5 Portable, Web-Based Formats: DWF and PDF      86
                                         3.6 File Exchange Versus Building
                                             Model Repositories                            87
                                         3.7 Summary                                       90

                             CHAPTER 4   BIM for Owners and Facility Managers               93
                                         4.0 Executive Summary                              93
                                         4.1 Introduction: Why Owners Should Care
                                             About BIM                                      94
                                         4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners               96
                                         4.3 Types of Owners: Why, How Often, and Where
                                             They Build                                    111
                                         4.4 How Owners Build                              115
                                         4.5 BIM Tool Guide for Owners                     120
                                         4.6 An Owner and Facility Manager’s Building
                                             Model                                         130
                                         4.7 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project   133
                                         4.8 Barriers to Implementing BIM: Risks and
                                             Common Myths                                  141
                                         4.9 Guidelines and Issues for Owners to
                                             Consider When Adopting BIM                    145

                             CHAPTER 5   BIM for Architects and Engineers                  149
                                         5.0 Executive summary                             149
                                         5.1 Introduction                                  150
                                         5.2 Scope of Design Services                      152
                                         5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes                   156
                                         5.4 Building Element Models and Libraries         190
                                         5.5 Considerations in Adoption for
                                             Design Practice                               196
                                         5.6 New and Changed Staffing within
                                             Design Firms                                  202
                                         5.7 New Contractual Opportunities in Design       204

                             CHAPTER 6   BIM for the Construction Industry                 207
                                         6.0 Executive Summary                             207
                                         6.1 Introduction                                  208
                                         6.2 Types of Construction Firms                   209
                                         6.3 Information Contractors Want from BIM         212
                                         6.4 Processes to Develop a Contractor
                                             Building Information Model                    213




ftoc.indd iv                                                                                1/16/08 11:32:13 AM
                                                                                  Contents   v

                          6.5 Reduction of Design Errors Using              216
                              Clash Detection
                          6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating          218
                          6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning            224
                          6.8 Integration with Cost and Schedule Control
                              and Other Management Functions                233
                          6.9 Use for Offsite Fabrication                   235
                          6.10 Use of BIM Onsite: Verification, Guidance,
                               and Tracking of Construction Activities      236
                          6.11 Implications for Contract and
                               Organizational Changes                       238
                          6.12 BIM Implementation                           240

              CHAPTER 7   BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators            243
                          7.0 Executive Summary                             243
                          7.1 Introduction                                  244
                          7.2 Types of Subcontractors and Fabricators       246
                          7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for
                              Subcontractor Fabricators                     248
                          7.4 BIM-Enabled Process Change                    260
                          7.5 Generic BIM System Requirements
                              for Fabricators                               264
                          7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their
                              Specific Needs                                268
                          7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation       276
                          7.8 Conclusions                                   282

              CHAPTER 8   The Future: Building with BIM                     285
                          8.0 Executive Summary                             285
                          8.1 Introduction                                  286
                          8.2 The Development of BIM Up To 2007             287
                          8.3 Current Trends                                288
                          8.4 Vision 2012                                   292
                          8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts
                              up to 2020                                    308

              CHAPTER 9   BIM Case Studies                                  319
                          9.0 Introduction to BIM Case Studies              319
                          9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion        324
                          9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM
                              Implementation                                339




ftoc.indd v                                                                             1/16/08 11:32:14 AM
               vi Contents

                             9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain
                                 View Medical Office Building Complex      358
                             9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center          375
                             9.5 San Francisco Federal Building            388
                             9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City            405
                             9.7 One Island East Project                   418
                             9.8 Penn National Parking Structure           432
                             9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project               441
                             9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi   450

                             Glossary                                      467
                             Bibliography                                  469
                             Index                                         485




ftoc.indd vi                                                                1/16/08 11:32:14 AM
                 Preface

                      his book is about a new approach to design, construction, and facility
                 T    management called building information modeling (BIM). It provides an
                 in-depth understanding of BIM technologies, the business and organizational
                 issues associated with its implementation, and the profound impacts that effec-
                 tive use of BIM can provide to all members of a project team. The book explains
                 how designing, constructing, and operating buildings with BIM differs from
                 pursuing the same activities in the traditional way using drawings, whether
                 paper or electronic.
                      BIM is beginning to change the way buildings look, the way they function,
                 and the ways in which they are built. Throughout the book, we have intentionally
                 and consistently used the term ‘BIM’ to describe an activity (meaning building
                 information modeling), rather than an object (building information model).
                 This reflects our belief that BIM is not a thing or a type of software but a human
                 activity that ultimately involves broad process changes in construction.



                             WHY A BIM HANDBOOK?

                 Our motivation in writing this book was to provide a thorough and consoli-
                 dated reference to help students and practitioners in the building industry learn
                 about this exciting new approach, in a format independent of the commercial
                 interests that guide vendors’ literature on the subject. There are many truths
                 and myths in the generally accepted perceptions of the state of the art of BIM.
                 We hope that the BIM Handbook will help reinforce the truths, dispel the
                 myths, and guide our readers to successful implementations. Many well-
                 meaning decision-makers and practitioners in the building industry at-large
                 have had disappointing experiences after attempting to adopt BIM, because their
                 efforts and expectations were based on misconceptions and inadequate plan-
                 ning. If this book can help readers avoid these frustrations and costs, we will
                 have succeeded.
                     Collectively, the authors have a wealth of experience with BIM. We believe
                 that BIM represents a paradigm change that will have far-reaching benefits, not


                                                                                                        vii



fpref.indd vii                                                                                        12/19/07 8:52:39 PM
             viii Preface

                            only for those in the building industry but for society at-large, as better build-
                            ings are built that consume less energy and require less labor and capital
                            resources. We make no claim that the book is objective in terms of our judg-
                            ment of the necessity for BIM. At the same time, of course, we have made every
                            effort to ensure the accuracy and completeness of the facts and figures
                            presented.



                                        WHO IS THE BIM HANDBOOK FOR,
                                        AND WHAT IS IN IT?

                            The BIM Handbook is addressed to building developers, owners, managers,
                            and inspectors; to architects, engineers of all disciplines, construction contrac-
                            tors, and fabricators; and to students of architecture, civil engineering, and
                            building construction. It reviews Building Information Modeling and its related
                            technologies, its potential benefits, its costs and needed infrastructure. It also
                            discusses the present and future influences of BIM on regulatory agencies; legal
                            practice associated with the building industry; and manufacturers of building
                            products—it is directed at readers in these areas. A rich set of BIM case studies
                            are presented and various BIM tools and technologies are described. Industry
                            and societal impacts are also explored.
                                The book has four sections:

                                I. Chapters 1, 2, and 3 provide an introduction to BIM and the technologies
                                   that support it. These chapters describe the current state of the building
                                   industry, the potential benefits of BIM, parametric modeling of build-
                                   ings, and interoperability issues.
                               II. Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 provide discipline-specific perspectives of BIM.
                                   They are aimed at owners (Chapter 4), designers of all kinds (Chapter 5),
                                   general contractors (Chapter 6), and subcontractors and fabricators
                                   (Chapter 7).
                              III. Chapter 8 discusses potential impacts and future trends associated with
                                   the advent of BIM-enabled design, construction, and operation of build-
                                   ings. Current trends are described and extrapolated through the year
                                   2012 as are forecasts of potential long-term developments and the
                                   research needed to support them through 2020.
                              IV. Chapter 9 provides ten detailed cases studies of BIM in the construction
                                  industry that demonstrate its use for feasibility studies, conceptual design,
                                  estimating, detailing, coordination, construction planning, logistics,




fpref.indd viii                                                                                             12/19/07 8:52:40 PM
                                                                                                      Preface   ix

                       operations and many other common construction activities. The case
                       studies include buildings with signature architectural and structural de-
                       signs (such as the Beijing National Aquatics Center, the 100 11th Avenue
                       apartment building facade in New York City, and the environmentally
                       friendly Federal Building in San Francisco) as well as a wide range of
                       fairly common buildings (a GM production plant, a federal courthouse,
                       a medical office building, a parking structure, a high-rise office building,
                       a mixed commercial and retail development, and a coast-guard training
                       facility).



                            HOW TO USE THE BIM HANDBOOK

                Many readers will find the Handbook a useful resource whenever they are con-
                fronted with new terms and ideas related to BIM in the course of their work or
                study. A thorough first-reading, while not essential, is of course the best way to
                gain a deeper understanding of the significant changes that BIM is bringing
                to the building industry.
                     The first section (Chapters 1–3) is recommended for all readers. It gives a
                background to the commercial context and the technologies for BIM. Chapter
                1 lists many of the potential benefits that can be expected. It first describes the
                difficulties inherent in current practice within the U.S. building industry and
                its associated poor productivity and higher costs. It then describes various
                approaches to procuring construction, such as traditional design-bid-build,
                design-build, and others, describing the pros and cons for each in terms of
                realizing benefits from the use of BIM. Chapter 2 details the technological
                foundations of BIM, in particular parametric and object-oriented modeling. The
                history of these technologies and their current state of the art are described.
                The chapter then reviews the leading commercial application platforms for
                generating building information models. Chapter 3 deals with the intricacies of
                interoperability, including how building information can be communicated and
                shared from profession to profession and from application to application.
                Chapters 2 and 3 can also be used as a reference for the technical aspects of
                parametric modeling and interoperability.
                     Readers who desire specific information on how they can adopt and
                implement BIM in their companies can find the details they need in the rele-
                vant chapter for their profession within Chapters 4–7. You may wish to read
                the chapter closest to your area of interest and then only the executive
                summaries of each of the other chapters. There is a small degree of overlap
                within these chapters, where issues are relevant to multiple professions. These




fpref.indd ix                                                                                               12/19/07 8:52:41 PM
           x Preface

                       chapters make frequent reference to the set of detailed case studies provided in
                       Chapter 9.
                            Those who wish to learn about the long term economic, organizational,
                       social, and professional implications of BIM and how they may impact your
                       educational or professional life will find an extensive discussion of these issues
                       in Chapter 8.
                            The case studies in Chapter 9 each tell a story about different profession-
                       als’ experiences using BIM on their projects. No one case study represents a
                       ‘complete’ implementation or covers the entire building lifecycle. In most
                       cases, the building was not complete when the study was written. But taken
                       together, they paint a picture of the variety of uses and the benefits and prob-
                       lems that these pioneering firms have already experienced. They illustrate what
                       could be achieved with exsiting BIM technology at the start of the 21st century.
                       There are many lessons learned that can provide assistance to our readers and
                       guide practices in future efforts.
                            Finally, students and professors are encouraged to make use of the study
                       questions and exercises provided at the conclusion of each chapter.



                                   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

                       Naturally, we are indebted first and foremost to our families, who have all
                       borne the brunt of the extensive time we have invested in this book.
                           Our thanks and appreciation for highly professional work are due to Laurie
                       Manfra, who copyedited the book, and to Jim Harper, our publisher repre-
                       sentative at John Wiley and Sons.
                           Our research for the book was greatly facilitated by numerous builders,
                       designers, and owners, representatives of software companies and government
                       agencies; we thank them all sincerely. Six of the case studies were originally
                       prepared by graduate students in the College of Architecture at Georgia Tech;
                       we thank them, and their efforts are acknowledged personally at the end of
                       each relevant case study. The case studies were made possible through the very
                       generous contributions of the project participants who corresponded with us
                       extensively and shared their understanding and insights.
                           Finally, we are grateful to Jerry Laiserin, not only for his enlightening fore-
                       word, but also for helping to initiate the idea for the BIM Handbook.




fpref.indd x                                                                                           12/19/07 8:52:41 PM
                Foreword

                  n recent years, both the concept and nomenclature we now know as BIM— or Building
                I Information Models and Building Information Modeling—have engaged professional
                and industry awareness sufficiently to justify treatment in handbook format. The result
                is this book, which amply fulfills the requirements anyone would expect of a handbook,
                with respect to both breadth of coverage and depth of exposition.
                      However, neither the concept nor nomenclature of BIM is new—not as of 2007,
                not as of 2002, nor even 1997. The concepts, approaches and methodologies that we
                now identify as BIM can be dated back nearly thirty years, while the terminology of
                the “Building Information Model” has been in circulation for at least fifteen years.
                Note that my gloss on the history of BIM, below, is necessarily condensed to isolated
                highlights; my apologies in advance to those whose contributions I may unintention-
                ally have slighted.
                      The earliest documented example I have found for the concept we know today as
                BIM was a working prototype “Building Description System” published in the now-
                defunct AIA Journal by Charles M. “Chuck” Eastman, then at Carnegie-Mellon Univer-
                sity, in 1975. Chuck’s work included such now-routine BIM notions as:

                    [designing by] “. . . interactively defining elements . . . deriv[ing] sections, plans, isomet-
                    rics or perspectives from the same description of elements . . . Any change of arrangement
                    would have to be made only once for all future drawings to be updated. All drawings
                    derived from the same arrangement of elements would automatically be consistent . . .
                    any type of quantitative analysis could be coupled directly to the description . . . cost esti-
                    mating or material quantities could be easily generated . . . providing a single integrated
                    database for visual and quantitative analyses . . . automated building code checking in
                    city hall or the architect’s office. Contractors of large projects may find this representation
                    advantageous for scheduling and materials ordering.” (Eastman 1975)

                     Comparable research and development work was conducted throughout the late
                1970s and early 1980s in Europe—especially in the UK—in parallel with early efforts at
                commercialization of this technology (see below). During the early 1980s this method or
                approach was most commonly described in the USA as “Building Product Models” and in
                Europe—especially in Finland—as “Product Information Models” (in both phrases,
                “product” was used to distinguish this approach from “process” models). The next logical
                step in this nomenclature evolution was to verbally factor out, so to speak, the duplicated
                “product” term, so that “Building Product Model” + “Product Information Model” would
                merge into “Building Information Model.” Although the German BauInformatik may be
                translated this way, its usual meaning more closely conforms to the general application of
                information and computer technology (ICT) to construction. However, the Dutch Gebou-
                wmodel was occasionally used in the mid-to-late 1980s in contexts that arguably could be
                translated to English as “Building Information Model” rather than the literal rendition of
                “Building Model.”



                                                                                                                         xi



flast.indd xi                                                                                                         1/10/08 11:33:13 PM
             xii Foreword

                                  The first documented use of the term “Building Modeling” in English—in the sense
                            that “Building Information Modeling” is used today—appeared in the title of a 1986
                            paper by Robert Aish, then with GMW Computers Ltd., makers of the legendary
                            RUCAPS software system. Aish, who is today with Bentley Systems, set out in this paper
                            all the arguments for what we now know as BIM and the technology to implement it,
                            including: 3D modeling; automatic drawing extraction; intelligent parametric compo-
                            nents; relational databases; temporal phasing of construction processes; and so forth
                            (Aish 1986). Aish illustrated these concepts with a case study applying the RUCAPS
                            building modeling system to the phased refurbishment of Terminal 3 at Heathrow Airport,
                            London (there is, in my opinion, a bit of historical irony in the fact that some twenty years
                            later, the construction of Terminal 5 at Heathrow often is cited as one of the “pioneering”
                            case examples of this technology).
                                  From “Building Model” it was but a short leap to “Building Information Model,”
                            for which the first documented use in English appeared in a paper by G.A. van Nederveen
                            and F. Tolman in the December 1992 Automation in Construction. (van Nederveen &
                            Tolman 1992).
                                  In parallel with the evolving nomenclature and the R&D efforts centered in
                            academia, commercial products implementing the BIM approach (under whatever com-
                            mercial moniker at the time) also have a long history. Many of the software functions and
                            behaviors ascribed to today’s generation of model-authoring tools, such as AllPlan, Archi-
                            CAD, Autodesk Revit, Bentley Building, DigitalProject or VectorWorks, were also the
                            design goals of earlier commercial software efforts such as: the UK lineage from RUCAPS
                            (cited above) to Sonata and Reflex; another UK lineage from Oxsys to BDS and GDS (the
                            latter still available as MicroGDS); a French lineage that included Cheops and Architrion
                            (the spirit of which lives on in BOA); Brics (a Belgian system that provided the technology
                            core for Bentley’s Triforma); the US-based Bausch & Lomb modeling system of 1984;
                            Intergraph’s efforts with Master Architect; plus many others, now but dimly remembered
                            (at least, within my recollection).
                                  Thus, by the time of my first attempt to popularize the term (Laiserin, 2002) and
                            craft a multi-vendor consensus around it (Laiserin, 2003) the core nomenclature of
                            Building Information Modeling had been coined at least ten years earlier, and the con-
                            cept or approach had been established more than a further fifteen years before that
                            (with numerous practical demonstrations along the way, most notably in the Finnish
                            efforts that culminated in the Vera Project by Tekes, the National Technology Agency of
                            Finland).
                                  The present book, as might be expected of any work crafted by multiple authors,
                            contains more than one definition of BIM—from process-oriented to product-oriented
                            and from constructor-practical to defining BIM by what it is not. Allow me to add yet
                            two more of my own: one, broader and more analytic than the subject as covered in this
                            Handbook; the other, more simplistic and functional than the Handbook treatment.
                                  Because my broader definition of BIM-as-process is wholly independent of software
                            for implementation, and therefore outside the scope of this book, I offer only the citations
                            here (Laiserin 2005, 2007). However, the arena of “BIM-ready” or “BIM-worthy” com-
                            mercial software for design and analysis has so expanded and matured in the decade
                            immediately preceding this writing, that I believe it is now both possible and worthwhile
                            to propose instead some quick and practical principles for qualifying BIM applications.
                            For this purpose, I suggest the following: that IFC certification (per the International Alli-
                            ance for Interoperability, IAI, and/or the buildingSMART initiative) be deemed a suffi-
                            cient, but not necessary condition of “BIM-ness” for any design, analysis or collaborative
                            software. IFC certification may be supplemented as needed by local requirements, such as
                            support for the GSA Space Object or conformity with the National BIM Standard in the




flast.indd xii                                                                                                         1/10/08 11:33:14 PM
                                                                                                                    Foreword    xiii

                  USA, or the IFC Code Checking View in Singapore. My point is that while there may be
                  numerous paths to BIM-ness, many of which need not lead through IFC certification,
                  surely it is the case that any design or analysis application that is IFC-certified has thereby
                  attained the requisite BIM-ness to be deemed BIM-ready, BIM-worthy, or indeed just plain
                  BIM.
                        Notwithstanding the semantic distinctions among various BIM definitions, some
                  people labor under the impression that I—or one or another of the design-software ven-
                  dors—“coined” the term and/or “originated” or “developed” or “introduced” the con-
                  cept or approach circa 2002. I have never claimed such distinction for myself, and it is
                  my opinion that the historical record outlined above shows that Building Information
                  Modeling was not an innovation attributable solely to any individual or entity.
                        Rather than “father of BIM”—as a few well-meaning but over-enthusiastic peers
                  have labeled me—I prefer the unattributed epithet “godfather of BIM,” in the sense that
                  a godfather is an adult sponsor of a child not his own. If anyone deserves the title
                  “father of BIM,” surely it is Chuck Eastman. From his 1975 pioneering prototype sys-
                  tem cited above to his 1999 text, Building Product Models (Eastman, 1999—the most
                  authoritative treatment of the subject prior to the present volume), Chuck devoted
                  a quarter century to defining the problems and advancing the solutions, plus a further
                  decade continuing to push forward the frontiers of Building, Information, and
                  Modeling.
                        In 2005, I had the honor and privilege of co-producing and co-hosting with Chuck
                  (and the PhD program at the College of Architecture, Georgia Institute of Technology)
                  the first industry-academic Conference on BIM (Laiserin, 2005). This venue featured a
                  broad cross-section of design-software and analysis vendors, as well as leading practi-
                  tioners such as Vladimir Bazjanac of Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratories and
                  Godfried Augenbroe of Georgia Tech. To complement our own opening keynotes,
                  Chuck and I were fortunate to engage for the conference’s closing keynote Paul Tei-
                  cholz, now emeritus at Stanford and the founder of Stanford’s Center for Integrated
                  Facility Engineering (CIFE—which has become the leading proponent of Virtual Design
                  and Construction, an approach I see as the ultimate state or end-game of BIM automa-
                  tion). Post-conference correspondence among Paul, Chuck and myself provided the
                  impetus for this Handbook.
                        In the course of producing the Handbook, Chuck and Paul engaged an additional
                  two formidable collaborators, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston. Rafael’s doctoral work
                  at Israel’s Technion addressed Computer Integrated Construction and Project Data Mod-
                  els, areas in which he subsequently collaborated with Chuck Eastman (especially regard-
                  ing structural engineering of steel and precast concrete systems). While pursuing her
                  doctorate at Stanford/CIFE, Kathleen co-authored seminal papers on construction
                  schedule simulation or 4D-CAD, and went on to commercialize that BIM-related tech-
                  nology in the successful software startup company, Common Point, Inc.
                        All of which brings us back to the present work. It would be difficult to imagine a
                  more accomplished quartet of authors in this field, or any team better suited to under-
                  take a task such as The BIM Handbook. What they have accomplished will stand as the
                  most definitive and authoritative treatment of the subject for many years to come. I now
                  place the reader in the capable hands of my friends and colleagues—Chuck, Paul, Rafael
                  and Kathleen—and their chef d’ouvre—The BIM Handbook.


                                                                                  JERRY LAISERIN
                                                                                  WOODBURY, NEW YORK
                                                                                  NOVEMBER 2007




flast.indd xiii                                                                                                                1/10/08 11:33:15 PM
            xiv Foreword

                                        ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

                           I wish to thank the following individuals for their generous assistance in documenting
                           the early history of the BIM concept and terminology: Bo-Christer Björk, Hanken Uni-
                           versity, Finland; Arto Kiviniemi, VTT, Finland; Heikki Kulusjarvi, Solibri, Inc., Finland;
                           Ghang Lee, Yonsei University, Korea; Robert Lipman, National Institute of Standards
                           and Technology, USA; Hannu Penttila, Mittaviiva Öy, Finland.



                                        REFERENCES

                           Aish, R., 1986, “Building Modelling: The Key to Integrated Construction CAD,” CIB 5th
                                International Symposium on the Use of Computers for Environmental Engineering
                                Related to Buildings, 7–9 July.
                           Eastman, C., 1975, “The Use of Computers Instead of Drawings,” AIA Journal, March,
                                Volume 63, Number 3, pp 46–50.
                           Eastman, C., 1999, Building Product Models: Computer Environments, Supporting
                                Design and Construction, CRC
                           Laiserin, J, 2002, “Comparing Pommes and Naranjas,” The LaiserinLetter™, December
                                16, Issue 16, http://www.laiserin.com/features/issue15/feature01.php
                           Laiserin, J, 2003, “The BIM Page,” The LaiserinLetter™, http://www.laiserin.com/
                                features/bim/index.php
                           Laiserin, J, 2005, “Conference on Building Information Modeling: Opportunities,
                                Challenges, Processes, Deployment,” April 19–20, http://www.laiserin.com/
                                laiserinlive/index.php
                           Laiserin, J., 2007, “To BIMfinity and Beyond!” Cadalyst, November, Volume 24, Number
                                11, pp 46–48.
                           van Nederveen, G.A. & Tolman, F., 1992, “Modelling Multiple Views on Buildings,”
                                Automation in Construction, December, Volume 1, Number 3, pp 215–224.




flast.indd xiv                                                                                                    1/10/08 11:33:15 PM
                 Figure 2-10                                                           Figure 4-9




                 Figure 4-11




                               Figure 5-5
               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.


Color_insert.indd 1                                                                                                                1/3/08 6:27:22 PM
            Figure 5-11   Figure 6-10




            Figure 6-15




Color_insert.indd 2                     1/3/08 6:27:34 PM
                Figure 7-8            Figure 8-3




               Figure 9-5-5


                                Figure 9-5-12




                Figure 9-5-14   Figure 9-5-17




Color_insert.indd Sec1:3                           1/3/08 6:27:41 PM
                                                              Figure 9-7-10




           Figure 9-6-8




                                                              Figure 9-7-12B




                       Figure 9-7-12A




                                                   Figure 9-8-2


                                  Figure 9-7-12C



Color_insert.indd Sec1:4                                                       1/3/08 6:27:52 PM
             CHAPTER                          1
             BIM Handbook Introduction



                    1.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                  uilding Information Modeling (BIM) is one of the most promising develop-
             B    ments in the architecture, engineering and construction (AEC) industries.
             With BIM technology, an accurate virtual model of a building is constructed
             digitally. When completed, the computer-generated model contains precise
             geometry and relevant data needed to support the construction, fabrication,
             and procurement activities needed to realize the building.
                  BIM also accommodates many of the functions needed to model the lifecycle
             of a building, providing the basis for new construction capabilities and changes
             in the roles and relationships among a project team. When implemented appro-
             priately, BIM facilitates a more integrated design and construction process that
             results in better quality buildings at lower cost and reduced project duration.
                  This chapter begins with a description of existing construction practices,
             and it documents the inefficiencies inherent in these methods. It then explains
             both the technology behind BIM and recommends ways to best take advantage
             of the new business processes it enables for the entire lifecycle of a building. It
             concludes with an appraisal of various problems one might encounter when
             converting to BIM technology.


                    1.1 INTRODUCTION

             To better understand the significant changes that BIM introduces, this chapter
             begins with a description of current paper-based design and construction

             BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
             Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                     1



c01.indd 1                                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:51:42 PM
             2 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                   methods and the predominant business models now in use by the construction
                                   industry. It then describes various problems associated with these practices,
                                   outlines what BIM is, and explains how it differs from 2D and 3D computer-
                                   aided design (CAD). We give a brief description of the kinds of problems that
                                   BIM can solve and the new business models that it enables. The chapter con-
                                   cludes with a presentation of the most significant problems that may arise
                                   when using the technology, which is now only in its earliest phase of develop-
                                   ment and use.



                                        1.2 THE CURRENT AEC BUSINESS MODEL

                                   Currently, the facility delivery process remains fragmented, and it depends on
                                   paper-based modes of communication. Errors and omissions in paper docu-
                                   ments often cause unanticipated field costs, delays, and eventual lawsuits
                                   between the various parties in a project team. These problems cause friction,
                                   financial expense, and delays. Recent efforts to address such problems have
                                   included: alternative organizational structures such as the design-build method;
                                   the use of real-time technology, such as project Web sites for sharing plans and
                                   documents; and the implementation of 3D CAD tools. Though these methods
                                   have improved the timely exchange of information, they have done little to
                                   reduce the severity and frequency of conflicts caused by paper documents.
                                       One of the most common problems associated with paper-based commu-
                                   nication during the design phase is the considerable time and expense required
                                   to generate critical assessment information about a proposed design, including
                                   cost estimates, energy-use analysis, structural details, etc. These analyses are
                                   normally done last, when it is already too late to make important changes.
                                   Because these iterative improvements do not happen during the design phase,
                                   value engineering must then be undertaken to address inconsistencies, which
                                   often results in compromises to the original design.
                                       Regardless of the contractual approach, certain statistics are common to
                                   nearly all large-scale projects ($10 M or more), including the number of people
                                   involved and the amount of information generated. The following data was
                                   compiled by Maged Abdelsayed of Tardif, Murray & Associates, a construction
                                   company located in Quebec, Canada (Hendrickson 2003):

                                       • Number of participants (companies): 420 (including all suppliers and
                                         sub-sub-contractors)
                                       • Number of participants (individuals): 850
                                       • Number of different types of documents generated: 50




c01.indd 2                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:51:44 PM
                                                                                                                          1.2 The Current AEC Business Model     3

                    • Number of pages of documents: 56,000
                    • Number of bankers boxes to hold project documents: 25
                    • Number of 4-drawer filing cabinets: 6
                    • Number of 20 inch diameter, 20 year old, 50 feet high, trees used to
                      generate this volume of paper: 6
                    • Equivalent number of Mega Bytes of electronic data to hold this volume
                      of paper (scanned): 3,000 MB
                    • Equivalent number of compact discs (CDs): 6

                   It is not easy to manage an effort involving such a large number of people
              and documents, regardless of the contractual approach taken. Figure 1-1 illus-
              trates the typical members of a project team and their various organizational
              boundaries.
                   There are two dominant contract methods in the U.S, Design-Bid-Build
              and Design-Build, and many variations of them (Sanvido and Konchar 1999;
              Warne and Beard 2005).

              1.2.1 Design-Bid-Build (DBB)
              A significant percentage of buildings are built using the DBB approach (almost
              90% of public buildings and about 40% of private buildings in 2002) (DBIA
              2007). The two major benefits of this approach are: more competitive bidding
              to achieve the lowest possible price for an owner; and less political pressure to
              select a given contractor. (The latter is particularly important for public
              projects). Figure 1-2 illustrates the typical DBB procurement process as
              compared to the typical Design-Build (DB) process (see section 1.2.2)

                                                                                                                                            FIGURE 1-1
                                                                                                                                            Conceptual diagram
                                                                         Owner                                                              representing an AEC
                      Design /Engineer                                Organization
                       Organization
                                                                                                                                            project team and the
                                                                                                                                            typical organizational
                                                                                                         Outside Organizations              boundaries.
                                                                                       Facility   (not typically part of AEC team, but
                                                                Owner      Facility
                    Architect / Structural                                                        sometimes participants in meetings)
                                                                           Users      Managers
                    Designer Engineer
                                             Construction
                                               Manager
                                                                                                  Community     Insurer     Financial



                  Scheduler    Estimator
                                             Contractor                                                       Government
                        Building                          Subcontractor Fabricator Manufacturer                Agencies
                      Organization                                                  Supplier
                                                                     Subcontractor
                                                                     Organizations




c01.indd Sec1:3                                                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:51:44 PM
          4 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

          FIGURE 1-2
          Schematic diagram of
          Design-Bid-Build and
          Design-Build processes.




                                         In the DBB model, the client (owner) hires an architect, who then develops a
                                    list of building requirements (a program) and establishes the project’s design
                                    objectives. The architect proceeds through a series of phases: schematic design,
                                    design development, and contract documents. The final documents must fulfill
                                    the program and satisfy local building and zoning codes. The architect either hires
                                    employees or contracts consultants to assist in designing structural, HVAC,
                                    piping, and plumbing components. These designs are recorded on drawings
                                    (plans, elevations, 3D visualizations), which must then be coordinated to reflect
                                    all of the changes as they are identified. The final set of drawings and specifica-
                                    tions must contain sufficient detail to facilitate construction bids. Because of
                                    potential liability, an architect may choose to include fewer details in the drawings
                                    or insert language indicating that the drawings cannot be relied on for dimen-
                                    sional accuracy. These practices often lead to disputes with the contractor, as
                                    errors and omissions are detected and responsibility and extra costs reallocated.
                                         Stage two involves obtaining bids from general contractors. The owner
                                    and architect may play a role in determining which contractors can bid. Each
                                    contractor must be sent a set of drawings and specifications which are then
                                    used to compile an independent quantity survey. These quantities, together




c01.indd Sec1:4                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:51:45 PM
                                                                                               1.2 The Current AEC Business Model   5

              with the bids from subcontractors are then used to determine their cost esti-
              mate. Subcontractors selected by the contractors must follow the same process
              for the part of the project that they are involved with. Because of the effort
              required, contractors (general and subcontractors) typically spend approxi-
              mately 1% of their estimated costs in compiling bids.* If a contractor wins
              approximately one out of every 6 to 10 jobs that they bid on, the cost per suc-
              cessful bid averages from 6% to 10% of the entire project cost. This expense
              then gets added to the general and subcontractors’ overhead costs.
                   The winning contractor is usually the one with the lowest responsible bid,
              including work to be done by the general contractor and selected subcontrac-
              tors. Before work can begin, it is often necessary for the contractor to redraw
              some of the drawings to reflect the construction process and the phasing of
              work. These are called general arrangement drawings. The subcontractors and
              fabricators must also produce their own shop drawings to reflect accurate
              details of certain items, such as precast concrete units, steel connections,
              wall details, piping runs, etc.
                   The need for accurate and complete drawings extends to the shop draw-
              ings, as these are the most detailed representations and are used for actual
              fabrication. If these drawings are inaccurate or incomplete, or if they are based
              on drawings that already contain errors, inconsistencies or omissions, then
              expensive time-consuming conflicts will arise in the field. The costs associated
              with these conflicts can be significant.
                   Inconsistency, inaccuracy, and uncertainty in design make it difficult to
              fabricate materials offsite. As a result, most fabrication and construction must
              take place onsite and only when exact conditions are known. This is more
              costly, more time consuming, and prone to produce errors that would not occur
              if the work were performed in a factory environment where costs are lower and
              quality control is better.
                   Often during the construction phase, numerous changes are made to the
              design as a result of previously unknown errors and omissions, unanticipated
              site conditions, changes in material availabilities, questions about the design,
              new client requirements, and new technologies. These need to be resolved by
              the project team. For each change, a procedure is required to determine the
              cause, assign responsibility, evaluate time and cost implications, and address


              *
               Based on the second author’s personal experience in working with the construction industry.
              This includes the cost of duplicating the relevant drawings and specs, transporting them to each
              subcontractor, and the quantity takeoff and cost estimating processes. Electronic plan rooms are
              sometimes used to reduce the requirement for duplicating and transporting the plans and specs
              for each bidder.




c01.indd Sec1:5                                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:51:46 PM
          6 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                how the issue will be resolved. This procedure, whether initiated in writing or
                                with the use of a Web-based tool, involves a Request for Information (RFI),
                                which must then be answered by the architect or other relevant party. Next
                                a Change Order (CO) is issued and all impacted parties are notified about the
                                change, which is communicated together with needed changes in the drawings.
                                These changes and resolutions frequently lead to legal disputes, added costs,
                                and delays. Web site products for managing these transactions do help the
                                project team stay on top of each change, but because they do not address
                                the source of the problem, they are of marginal benefit.
                                    Problems typically arise when a contractor bids below the estimated cost
                                in order to win the job. He will then abuse the change process to recoup losses
                                incurred from the original bid. This, of course, leads to more disputes between
                                the owner and project team.
                                    In addition, the DBB process requires that the procurement of all materials
                                be held until the owner approves the bid, which means that long lead time
                                items cannot be ordered early enough to keep the project on schedule. For this
                                and other reasons (described below), the DBB approach often takes longer
                                than the DB approach.
                                    The final phase is commissioning the building, which takes place after
                                construction is finished. This involves testing the building systems (heating,
                                cooling, electrical, plumbing, fire sprinklers, etc.) to make sure they work
                                properly. Final contracts and drawings are then produced to reflect all as-built
                                changes, and these are delivered to the owner along with all manuals for
                                installed equipment. At this point, the DBB process is completed.
                                    Because all of the information provided to the owner is conveyed in 2D
                                (on paper), the owner must put in a considerable amount of effort to relay all
                                relevant information to the facility management team charged with maintain-
                                ing and operating the building. The process is time consuming, prone to error,
                                costly and remains a significant barrier.
                                    As a result of these problems, the DBB approach is probably not the most
                                expeditious or cost-efficient approach to design and construction. Other
                                approaches have been developed to address these problems.

                                1.2.2 Design-Build (DB)
                                The design-build process was developed to consolidate responsibility for
                                design and construction into a single contracting entity and to simplify the
                                administration of tasks for the owner (Beard et al. 2005). Figure 1-2 illustrates
                                this process.
                                     In this model, the owner contracts directly with the design-build team to
                                develop a well-defined building program and a schematic design. The DB




c01.indd Sec1:6                                                                                               12/19/07 1:51:47 PM
                                                                                   1.2 The Current AEC Business Model   7

              contractor then estimates the total cost and time needed to construct the
              building. After all modifications requested by the owner are implemented,
              the plan is approved and the final estimate cost for the project is established.
              It is important to note that because the DB model allows for modifications to
              be made to the building’s design earlier in the process, the amount of money
              and time needed to incorporate these changes is also reduced. The DB con-
              tractor establishes contractual relationships with specialty designers and sub-
              contractors as-needed. After this point, construction begins and any further
              changes to the design (within predefined limits) become the responsibility of
              the DB contractor. The same is true for errors and omissions. It is not neces-
              sary for detailed construction drawings to be complete for all parts of the
              building prior to the start of construction on the foundation, etc. As a result
              of these simplifications, the building is typically completed faster, with far
              fewer legal complications, and at a somewhat reduced total cost. On the other
              hand, there is less flexibility for the owner to make changes after the initial
              design is approved and a contract amount is established.
                   The DB model is becoming more common in the U.S. and is used widely
              abroad. Data is not currently available from U.S. government sources, but the
              Design Build Institute of America (DBIA) estimates that, in 2006, approxi-
              mately 40% of construction projects in the U.S. relied on a variation of the DB
              procurement approach. Higher percentages (50%–70%) were measured for
              some governmental organizations (Navy, Army, Air Force, and GSA). The
              trend toward increasing use of DB is very strong (Evey 2006).

              1.2.3 What Kind of Building Procurement Is Best When
                    BIM Is Used
              There are many variations of the design-to-construction business process,
              including the organization of the project team, how the team members are
              paid, and who absorbs various risks. There are lump sum contracts, cost plus
              a fixed or percentage fee, various forms of negotiated contracts, etc. It is beyond
              the scope of this book to outline each of these and the benefits and problems
              associated with each of them (see Sanvido and Konchar 1999 and Warne and
              Beard 2005).
                   With regard to the use of BIM, the general issues that either enhance or
              diminish the positive changes that this technology offers depends on how well
              and at what stage the project team works collaboratively on the digital model.
              The earlier the model can be developed and shared, the more useful it will be. The
              DB approach provides an excellent opportunity to exploit BIM technology,
              because a single entity is responsible for design and construction and both areas
              participate during the design phase. Other procurement approaches can also




c01.indd Sec1:7                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:51:47 PM
          8 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                      benefit from the use of BIM but may achieve only partial benefits, particularly
                                      if the BIM technology is not used collaboratively during the design phase.



                                           1.3 DOCUMENTED INEFFICIENCIES OF
                                               TRADITIONAL APPROACHES

                                      This section documents how traditional practices contribute unnecessary waste
                                      and errors. Evidence of poor field productivity is illustrated in a graph devel-
                                      oped by the Center for Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) at Stanford
                                      University (CIFE, 2007). The impact of poor information flow and redundancy
                                      is illustrated using the results of a study performed by the National Institute of
                                      Standards and Technology (NIST) (Gallaher et al. 2004).

                                      1.3.1 CIFE Study of Construction Industry Labor Productivity
                                      Extra costs associated with traditional design and construction practices have
                                      been documented through various research studies. Figure 1-3 developed by
                                      the second author at CIFE, illustrates productivity within the U.S. field con-
                                      struction industry relative to all non-farm industries over a period of forty
                                      years, from 1964 through 2004 (the last year for which data is available). The
                                      data was calculated by dividing constant contract dollars (from the Department


          FIGURE 1-3
          Indexes of labor
          productivity for
          construction and
          non-farm industries,
          1964–2004.
          Adapted from research
          by Paul Teicholz at CIFE.




c01.indd Sec1:8                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:51:48 PM
                                                                  1.3 Documented Inefficiencies of Traditional Approaches   9

              of Commerce) by field man-hours of labor for those contracts (from the
              Bureau of Labor Statistics). These contracts include architectural and engi-
              neering costs as well as cost for materials and for the delivery of offsite compo-
              nents to the site. Costs associated with the installation of heavy production
              equipment, such as printing presses, stamping machines, etc., are not included.
              The amount of man hours required for labor excludes offsite work, such as
              steel fabrication, precast concrete, etc. During this 40-year-long period, the
              productivity of non-farm industries (including construction) has more than
              doubled. Meanwhile, labor productivity within the construction industry alone
              is estimated to be 10% less than what it was in 1964. Labor represents about
              40%–60% of construction’s estimated costs. Owners were actually paying
              approximately 5% more in 2004 than they would have paid for the same build-
              ing in 1964. Of course, many material and technological improvements have
              been made to buildings in the last four decades. The results are perhaps better
              than they appear, because quality has increased substantially. On the other
              hand, manufactured products are also more complex than they used to be, but
              they now can be produced at significantly lower cost. The replacement of man-
              ual labor with automated equipment has resulted in lower labor costs and
              increased quality. But the same cannot be said for construction practices.
                   Contractors have made greater use of offsite components which take advan-
              tage of factory conditions and specialized equipment. Clearly, this has allowed for
              higher quality and lower cost production of components, as compared to onsite
              work. Although the cost of these components is included in our construction cost
              data, the labor is not. This tends to make onsite construction productivity appear
              better than it actually is. The extent of this error, however, is difficult to evaluate
              because the total cost of offsite production cost is not well-documented.
                   While the reasons for the apparent decrease in construction productivity are
              not completely understood, the statistics are dramatic and point at organizational
              impediments within the construction industry. It is clear that efficiencies achieved
              in the manufacturing industry through automation, the use of information
              systems, better supply chain management and improved collaboration tools, have
              not yet been achieved in field construction. Possible reasons for this include:

                  • Sixty-five percent of construction firms consist of less than 5 people,
                    making it difficult for them to invest in new technology; even the largest
                    firms account for less than 0.5% of total construction volume and are
                    not able to establish industry leadership (see Figure 6-1 in Chapter 6).
                  • The real inflation-adjusted wages and the benefit packages of construc-
                    tion workers have stagnated over this time period. Union participation has
                    declined and the use of immigrant workers has increased, discouraging the




c01.indd Sec2:9                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:51:48 PM
          10 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                      need for labor-saving innovations. While innovations have been introduced,
                                      such as nail guns, larger and more effective earth moving equipment and
                                      better cranes, the productivity improvements associated with them have
                                      not been sufficient to change overall field labor productivity.

                                     The adoption of new and improved business practices within both design
                                and construction has been noticeably slow and limited primarily to large firms.
                                In addition, the introduction of new technologies has been fragmented. Often
                                times, it remains necessary to revert back to paper or 2D CAD drawings so
                                that all members of a project team are able to communicate with each other
                                and to keep the pool of potential contractors and subcontractors bidding on a
                                project sufficiently large.
                                     Whereas manufacturers often have long term agreements and collaborate
                                in agreed upon ways with the same partners, construction projects typically
                                involve different partners working together for a period of time and then dis-
                                persing. As a result, there are few or no opportunities to realize improvements
                                over time through applied learning. Rather, each partner acts to protect him or
                                herself from potential disputes that could lead to legal difficulties by relying on
                                antiquated and time-consuming processes that make it difficult or impossible
                                to implement resolutions quickly and efficiently. Of course, this translates to
                                higher cost and time expenditures.
                                     Another possible cause for the construction industry’s stagnant productiv-
                                ity is that onsite construction has not benefited significantly from automation.
                                Thus, field productivity relies on qualified training of field labor. Figure 1-4
                                shows that, since 1974, compensation for hourly workers has steadily declined


          FIGURE 1-4
          Trends in real
          wages (1990 $) for
          manufacturing and
          construction hourly
          workers, 1974–1996.
          BLS, Series ID :
          EES00500006.




c01.indd Sec2:10                                                                                                12/19/07 1:51:49 PM
                                                            1.3 Documented Inefficiencies of Traditional Approaches    11

              with the increase in use of non-union immigrant workers with little prior train-
              ing. The lower cost associated with these workers has discouraged efforts to
              replace field labor with automated (or offsite) solutions.
                   Existing problems within the construction industry also involve issues
              unrelated to the use of advanced technologies. These business practices
              (described above) limit how quickly new and innovative tools can be adopted.
              Pushing in the other direction is the growing competitive pressure of globaliza-
              tion which allows overseas firms to provide services and/or materials used in
              local projects. To cope with this added pressure, leading U.S. firms will need to
              implement changes that allow them to work faster and more efficiently than
              they otherwise would.


              1.3.2 NIST Study of Cost of Construction Industry Inefficiency
              The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) performed a study
              of the additional cost incurred by building owners as a result of inadequate
              interoperability (Gallaher et al. 2004). The study involved both the exchange
              and management of information, in which individual systems were unable to
              access and use information imported from other systems. In the construction
              industry, incompatibility between systems often prevents members of the project
              team from sharing information rapidly and accurately; it is the cause of numer-
              ous problems, including added costs, etc. The NIST study included commercial,
              industrial and institutional buildings and focused on new and “set in place”
              construction taking place in 2002. The results showed that inefficient interoper-
              ability accounted for an increase in construction costs by $6.12 per sf for new
              construction and an increase in $0.23 per sf for operations and maintenance
              (O & M), resulting in a total added cost of $15.8 billion. Table 1-1 shows the
              breakdown of these costs and to which stakeholder they were applied.
                   In the NIST study, the cost of inadequate interoperability was calculated by
              comparing current business activities and costs with hypothetical scenarios in
              which there was seamless information flow and no redundant data entry. NIST
              determined that the following costs resulted from inadequate interoperability:

                   • Avoidance (redundant computer systems, inefficient business process
                     management, redundant IT support staffing)
                   • Mitigation (manual reentry of data, request for information management)
                   • Delay (costs for idle employees and other resources)

                   Of these costs, roughly 68% ($10.6 billion) were incurred by building
              owners and operators. These estimates are speculative, due to the impossibil-
              ity of providing accurate data. They are, however, significant and worthy of
              serious consideration and effort to reduce or avoid them as much as possible.




c01.indd Sec2:11                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:51:49 PM
          12 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                Table 1-1 Additional costs of inadequate interoperability in the construction
                                industry, 2002 (in $millions).
                                                         Planning, Engineering,        Construction     O&M           Total
                                 Stakeholder Group           Design Phase                 Phase         Phase       Added Cost

                                 Architects and                $1,007.2                    $147.0         $15.7      $1,169.8
                                 Engineers

                                 General Contractors             $485.9                  $1,265.3         $50.4      $1,801.6

                                 Special Contractors             $442.4                  $1,762.2                    $2,204.6
                                 and Suppliers

                                 Owners and                      $722.8                    $898.0      $9,027.2     $1,0648.0
                                 Operators

                                 Total                         $2,658.3                 $4,072.4       $9,093.3     $15,824.0

                                 Applicable sf in 2002         1.1 billion               1.1 billion   39 billion   n/a

                                 Added cost/sf                 $2.42/sf                  $3.70/sf      $0.23/sf     n/a

                                Source: Table 6-1 NIST study (Gallaher et al. 2004).



                                Widespread adoption of BIM and the use of a comprehensive digital model
                                throughout the lifecycle of a building would be a step in the right direction to
                                eliminate such costs resulting from the inadequate interoperability of data.


                                      1.4 BIM: NEW TOOLS AND NEW PROCESSES

                                This section gives an overall description of BIM-related terminology, concepts,
                                and functional capabilities; and it addresses how these tools can improve busi-
                                ness processes. Specific topics are discussed in further detail in the chapters
                                indicated in parenthesis.

                                1.4.1 BIM Model Creation Tools (Chapter 2)
                                All CAD systems generate digital files. Older CAD systems produce plotted
                                drawings. They generate files that consist primarily of vectors, associated
                                line-types, and layer identifications. As these systems were further devel-
                                oped, additional information was added to these files to allow for blocks of
                                data and associated text. With the introduction of 3D modeling, advanced
                                definition and complex surfacing tools were added.
                                     As CAD systems became more intelligent and more users wanted to share
                                data associated with a given design, the focus shifted from drawings and 3D
                                images to the data itself. A building model produced by a BIM tool can support
                                multiple different views of the data contained within a drawing set, including
                                2D and 3D. A building model can be described by its content (what objects it




c01.indd Sec2:12                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:51:50 PM
                                                                                  1.4 BIM: New Tools and New Processes    13

              describes) or its capabilities (what kinds of information requirements it can
              support). The latter approach is preferable, because it defines what you can do
              with the model rather than how the database is constructed (which will
              vary with each implementation).


                   For the purpose of this book, we define BIM as a modeling technology
                   and associated set of processes to produce, communicate, and analyze
                   building models. Building models are characterized by:


                   • Building components that are represented with intelligent digital repre-
                     sentations (objects) that ’know‘ what they are, and can be associated
                     with computable graphic and data attributes and parametric rules.
                   • Components that include data that describe how they behave, as
                     needed for analyses and work processes, e.g., takeoff, specification,
                     and energy analysis.
                   • Consistent and non-redundant data such that changes to component
                     data are represented in all views of the component.
                   • Coordinated data such that all views of a model are represented in
                     a coordinated way.



                  The following is a definition of BIM technology provided by the M.A.
              Mortenson Company, a construction contracting firm that has used BIM tools
              extensively within their practice (Campbell 2006).

              Mortenson’s Definition of BIM Technology
              BIM has its roots in computer-aided design research from decades ago, yet it still
              has no single, widely-accepted definition. We at the M.A. Mortenson Company
              think of it as “an intelligent simulation of architecture.” To enable us to achieve
              integrated delivery, this simulation must exhibit six key characteristics. It must be:

                    • Digital,
                    • Spatial (3D),
                    • Measurable (quantifiable, dimension-able, and query-able),
                    • Comprehensive (encapsulating and communicating design intent, build-
                      ing performance, constructability, and include sequential and financial
                      aspects of means and methods),
                    • Accessible (to the entire AEC/ owner team through an interoperable and
                      intuitive interface), and
                    • Durable (usable through all phases of a facility’s life).




c01.indd Sec3:13                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:51:50 PM
          14 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                     In light of these definitions, one might argue that few design or construc-
                                tion teams are truly using BIM today. In fact, we may not achieve this high
                                standard for several years. But we believe these characteristics are all essential
                                for reaching the goal of integrated practice.
                                     Furthermore, there are no current implementations of BIM software that
                                meet all of the BIM technology criteria. Over time, the capabilities will grow as
                                will the ability to support better and more extensive practices. The list in the
                                following section is intended to provide a starting point for evaluating specific
                                BIM software tools. See Chapter 2 for more detailed information about BIM
                                technology and an analysis of current BIM tools.


                                1.4.2 Definition of Parametric Objects (Chapter 2)
                                The concept of parametric objects is central to understanding BIM and its
                                differentiation from traditional 2D objects. Parametric BIM objects are defined
                                as follows:

                                    • consist of geometric definitions and associated data and rules.
                                    • geometry is integrated non-redundantly, and allows for no inconsisten-
                                      cies. When an object is shown in 3D, the shape cannot be represented
                                      internally redundantly, for example as multiple 2D views. A plan and
                                      elevation of a given object must always be consistent. Dimensions can-
                                      not be ‘fudged’.
                                    • Parametric rules for objects automatically modify associated geometries
                                      when inserted into a building model or when changes are made to associ-
                                      ated objects. For example, a door will fit automatically into a wall, a light
                                      switch will automatically locate next to the proper side of the door, a wall
                                      will automatically resize itself to automatically butt to a ceiling or roof, etc.
                                    • Objects can be defined at different levels of aggregation, so we can define
                                      a wall as well as its related components. Objects can be defined and man-
                                      aged at any number of hierarchy levels. For example, if the weight of a
                                      wall subcomponent changes, the weight of the wall should also change.
                                    • Objects rules can identify when a particular change violates object
                                      feasibility regarding size, manufacturability, etc.
                                    • objects have the ability to link to or receive, broadcast or export sets of
                                      attributes, e.g., structural materials, acoustic data, energy data, etc. to
                                      other applications and models.

                                    Technologies that allow users to produce building models that consist of
                                parametric objects are considered BIM authoring tools. In Chapter 2 we




c01.indd Sec3:14                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:51:51 PM
                                                                                     1.5 What Is Not BIM Technology    15

              elaborate the discussion of parametric technologies and discuss common capa-
              bilities in BIM tools including features to automatically extract consistent
              drawings and to extract reports of geometric parameters. In Chapters 4–7 we
              discuss these capabilities and others and their potential benefits to various
              AEC practitioners and building owners.


              1.4.3 Support for Project Team Collaboration (Chapter 3)
              Open interfaces should allow for the import of relevant data (for creating and
              editing a design) and export of data in various formats (to support integration
              with other applications and workflows). There are two primary approaches
              for such integration: (1) to stay within one software vendor’s products or (2) to
              use software from various vendors that can exchange data using industry sup-
              ported standards. The first approach allows for tighter integration among prod-
              ucts in multiple directions. For example, changes to the architectural model will
              generate changes to the structural model, and vice versa. This requires, however,
              that all members of a design team use software provided from the same vendor.
                   The second approach uses either proprietary or open-source, publicly
              available, and supported standards created to define building objects (Industry
              Foundation Classes or IFCs). These standards may provide a mechanism for
              interoperability among applications with different internal formats. This
              approach provides more flexibility at the expense of reduced interoperability,
              especially if the various software programs in-use for a given project do not
              support the same exchange standards. This allows objects from one BIM appli-
              cation to be exported from or imported into another (see Chapter 3 for an
              extensive discussion of collaboration technology).




                   1.5 WHAT IS NOT BIM TECHNOLOGY

              The term BIM is a popular buzz word used by software developers to describe
              the capabilities that their products offer. As such, the definition of what consti-
              tutes BIM technology is subject to variation and confusion. To deal with this
              confusion, it is useful to describe modeling solutions that DO NOT utilize BIM
              technology. These include tools that create the following kinds of models:

                   Models that contain 3D data only and no object attributes. These are
                   models that can only be used for graphic visualizations and have no intel-
                   ligence at the object level. They are fine for visualization but provide no
                   support for data integration and design analysis.




c01.indd Sec4:15                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:51:51 PM
          16 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                    Models with no support of behavior. These are models that define objects
                                    but cannot adjust their positioning or proportions because they do not
                                    utilize parametric intelligence. This makes changes extremely labor inten-
                                    sive and provides no protection against creating inconsistent or inaccurate
                                    views of the model.
                                    Models that are composed of multiple 2D CAD reference files that must
                                    be combined to define the building. It is impossible to ensure that the
                                    resulting 3D model will be feasible, consistent, countable, and display
                                    intelligence with respect to the objects contained within it.
                                    Models that allow changes to dimensions in one view that are not auto-
                                    matically reflected in other views. This allows for errors in the model that
                                    are very difficult to detect (similar to overriding a formula with a manual
                                    entry in a spreadsheet).



                                     1.6 WHAT ARE THE BENEFITS OF BIM? WHAT
                                         PROBLEMS DOES IT ADDRESS?

                                BIM technology can support and improve many business practices. Although
                                the AEC/FM (Facility Management) industry is in the early days of BIM use,
                                significant improvements have already been realized (compared to traditional
                                2D CAD or paper-based practices). Though it is unlikely that all of the advan-
                                tages discussed below are currently in use, we have listed them to show the
                                entire scope of changes that can be expected as BIM technology develops.


                                1.6.1 Pre-Construction Benefits to Owner
                                      (Chapters 4 and 5)
                                Concept, Feasibility and Design Benefits
                                Before owners engage an architect, it is necessary to determine whether a
                                building of a given size, quality level, and desired program requirements can be
                                built within a given cost and time budget, i.e. can a given building meet the
                                financial requirements of an owner. If these questions can be answered with
                                relative certainty, owners can then proceed with the expectation that their goals
                                are achievable. Finding out that a particular design is significantly over budget
                                after a considerable amount of time and effort has been expended is wasteful.
                                An approximate (or macro) building model built into and linked to a cost
                                database can be of tremendous value and assistance to an owner. This is
                                described in further detail in Chapter 4 and illustrated in the Hillwood
                                Commercial Project case study in Chapter 9.




c01.indd Sec4:16                                                                                              12/19/07 1:51:52 PM
                                                           1.6 What Are the Benefits of BIM, What Problems Does It Address?    17

              Increased Building Performance and Quality
              Developing a schematic model prior to generating a detailed building model
              allows for a more careful evaluation of the proposed scheme to determine
              whether it meets the building’s functional and sustainable requirements. Early
              evaluation of design alternatives using analysis/simulation tools increases the
              overall quality of the building.


              1.6.2 Design Benefits (Chapter 5)
              Earlier and More Accurate Visualizations of a Design
              The 3D model generated by the BIM software is designed directly rather than
              being generated from multiple 2D views. It can be used to visualize the design
              at any stage of the process with the expectation that it will be dimensionally
              consistent in every view.

              Automatic Low-Level Corrections When Changes Are Made to Design
              If the objects used in the design are controlled by parametric rules that ensure
              proper alignment, then the 3D model will be constructible. This reduces the
              user’s need to manage design changes (see Chapter 2 for further discussion of
              parametric rules).

              Generate Accurate and Consistent 2D Drawings at Any Stage of the Design
              Accurate and consistent drawings can be extracted for any set of objects or
              specified view of the project. This significantly reduces the amount of time and
              number of errors associated with generating construction drawings for all
              design disciplines. When changes to the design are required, fully consistent
              drawings can be generated as soon as the design modifications are entered.

              Earlier Collaboration of Multiple Design Disciplines
              BIM technology facilitates simultaneous work by multiple design disciplines.
              While collaboration with drawings is also possible, it is inherently more difficult
              and time consuming than working with one or more coordinated 3D models†
              in which change-control can be well managed. This shortens the design time
              and significantly reduces design errors and omissions. It also gives earlier
              insight into design problems and presents opportunities for a design to be con-
              tinuously improved. This is much more cost effective than waiting until a

              †
               If a BIM system does not use a single database, which can create problems for very large and/or
              finely detailed projects, alternative approaches involving automatic coordination of multiple files
              can also be used. This is an important implementation issue for software vendors. (See Chapter 2
              for more discussion of model size issues).




c01.indd Sec5:17                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:51:52 PM
          18 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                design is nearly complete and then applying value engineering only after the
                                major design decisions have been made.

                                Easily Check against the Design Intent
                                BIM provides earlier 3D visualizations and quantifies the area of spaces and
                                other material quantities, allowing for earlier and more accurate cost estimates.
                                For technical buildings (labs, hospitals, etc.), the design intent is often defined
                                quantitatively, and this allows a building model to be used to check for these
                                requirements. For qualitative requirements (this space should be near another,
                                etc.), the 3D model can support automatic evaluations.

                                Extract Cost Estimates during the Design Stage
                                At any stage of the design, BIM technology can extract an accurate bill of quan-
                                tities and spaces that can be used for cost estimation. In the early stages of a
                                design, cost estimates are based primarily on the unit cost per square foot. As
                                the design progresses, more detailed quantities are available and can be used
                                for more accurate and detailed cost estimates. It is possible to keep all parties
                                aware of the cost implications associated with a given design before it progresses
                                to the level of detailing required of construction bids. At the final stage of
                                design, an estimate based on the quantities for all the objects contained within
                                the model allows for the preparation of a more accurate final cost estimate. As
                                a result, it is possible to make better informed design decisions regarding costs
                                using BIM rather than a paper-based system.

                                Improve Energy Efficiency and Sustainability
                                Linking the building model to energy analysis tools allows evaluation of energy use
                                during the early design phases. This is not possible using traditional 2D tools
                                which require that a separate energy analysis be performed at the end of the design
                                process thus reducing the opportunities for modifications that could improve the
                                building’s energy performance. The capability to link the building model to various
                                types of analysis tools provides many opportunities to improve building quality.


                                1.6.3 Construction and Fabrication Benefits (Chapters 6 & 7)
                                Synchronize Design and Construction Planning
                                Construction planning using 4D CAD requires linking a construction plan to
                                the 3D objects in a design, so that it is possible to simulate the construction
                                process and show what the building and site would look like at any point in
                                time. This graphic simulation provides considerable insight into how the build-
                                ing will be constructed day-by-day and reveals sources of potential problems




c01.indd Sec5:18                                                                                                12/19/07 1:51:53 PM
                                                  1.6 What Are the Benefits of BIM, What Problems Does It Address?    19

              and opportunities for possible improvements (site, crew and equipment, space
              conflicts, safety problems, etc.). This type of analysis is not available from
              paper bid documents. It does, however, provide added benefit if the model
              includes temporary construction objects such as shoring, scaffolding, cranes,
              and other major equipment so that these objects can be linked to schedule
              activities and reflected in the desired construction plan.

              Discover Design Errors and Omissions before
              Construction (Clash Detection)
              Because the virtual 3D building model is the source for all 2D and 3D draw-
              ings, design errors caused by inconsistent 2D drawings are eliminated. In
              addition, because systems from all disciplines can be brought together and
              compared, multi-system interfaces are easily checked both systematically (for
              hard and soft clashes) and visually (for other kinds of errors). Conflicts are
              identified before they are detected in the field. Coordination among participat-
              ing designers and contractors is enhanced and errors of omission are signifi-
              cantly reduced. This speeds the construction process, reduces costs, minimizes
              the likelihood of legal disputes, and provides a smoother process for the entire
              project team.

              React Quickly to Design or Site Problems
              The impact of a suggested design change can be entered into the building
              model and changes to the other objects in the design will automatically update.
              Some updates will be made automatically based on the established parametric
              rules. Additional cross system updates can be checked and updated visually.
              The consequences of a change can be accurately reflected in the model and all
              subsequent views of it. In addition, design changes can be resolved more
              quickly in a BIM system because modifications can be shared, visualized, esti-
              mated, and resolved without the use of time-consuming paper transactions.
              Updating in this manner is extremely error-prone in paper-based systems.

              Use Design Model as Basis for Fabricated Components
              If the design model is transferred to a BIM fabrication tool and detailed to the
              level of fabrication objects (shop model), it will contain an accurate represen-
              tation of the building objects for fabrication and construction. Because compo-
              nents are already defined in 3D, their automated fabrication using numerical
              control machinery is facilitated. Such automation is standard practice today
              in steel fabrication and some sheet metal work. It has been used successfully in
              precast components, fenestration and glass fabrication. This allows vendors
              world-wide to elaborate on the model, to develop details needed for fabrication




c01.indd Sec5:19                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:51:53 PM
          20 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                and to maintain links that reflect the design intent. This facilitates offsite fab-
                                rication and reduces cost and construction time. The accuracy of BIM also
                                allows larger components of the design to be fabricated offsite than would
                                normally be attempted using 2D drawings, due to the likely need for onsite
                                changes (rework) and the inability to predict exact dimensions until other
                                items are constructed in the field.


                                Better Implementation and Lean Construction Techniques
                                Lean construction techniques require careful coordination between the general
                                contractor and subs to ensure that work can be performed when the appropri-
                                ate resources are available onsite. This minimizes wasted effort and reduces
                                the need for onsite material inventories. Because BIM provides an accurate
                                model of the design and the material resources required for each segment of
                                the work, it provides the basis for improved planning and scheduling of sub-
                                contractors and helps to ensure just-in-time arrival of people, equipment, and
                                materials. This reduces cost and allows for better collaboration at the job site.


                                Synchronize Procurement with Design and Construction
                                The complete building model provides accurate quantities for all (or most,
                                depending upon level of 3D modeling) of the materials and objects contained
                                within a design. These quantities, specifications, and properties can be used to
                                procure materials from product vendors and subcontractors (such as precast con-
                                crete subs). At the present time (2007), the object definitions for many manufac-
                                tured products have not yet been developed to make this capability a complete
                                reality. Where the models have been available (steel members, precast concrete
                                members), however, the results have been very beneficial.


                                1.6.4 Post Construction Benefits (Chapter 4)
                                Better Manage and Operate Facilities
                                The building model provides a source of information (graphics and specifica-
                                tions) for all systems used in a building. Previous analyses used to determine
                                mechanical equipment, control systems, and other purchases can be provided
                                to the owner, as a means for verifying the design decisions once the building is
                                in use. This information can be used to check that all systems work properly
                                after the building is completed.


                                Integrate with Facility Operation and Management Systems
                                A building model that has been updated with all changes made during con-
                                struction provides an accurate source of information about the as-built spaces




c01.indd Sec5:20                                                                                                12/19/07 1:51:53 PM
                                                                             1.7 What Challenges Can Be Expected?    21

              and systems and provides a useful starting point for managing and operating
              the building. A building information model supports monitoring of real-time
              control systems, provides a natural interface for sensors and remote operating
              management of facilities. Many of these capabilities have not yet been devel-
              oped, but BIM provides an ideal platform for their deployment. An example of
              how a building model can serve as a database for facility data is discussed in
              the Coast Guard Facility Planning case study in Chapter 9.



                   1.7 WHAT CHALLENGES CAN BE EXPECTED?

              Improved processes in each phase of design and construction will reduce the
              number and severity of problems associated with traditional practices. Intelli-
              gent use of BIM, however, will also cause significant changes in the relationships
              of project participants and the contractual agreements between them. (Tradi-
              tional contract terms are tailored to paper-based practices.) In addition, earlier
              collaboration between the architect, contractor, and other design disciplines
              will be needed, as knowledge provided by specialists is of more use during the
              design phase. (This is not consistent with the current design-bid-build business
              model.)


              1.7.1 Challenges with Collaboration and Teaming
              While BIM offers new methods for collaboration, it introduces other issues
              with respect to the development of effective teams. Determining the methods
              that will be used to permit adequate sharing of model information by mem-
              bers of the project team is a significant issue. If the architect uses traditional
              paper-based drawings, then it will be necessary for the contractor (or a third
              party) to build the model so that it can be used for construction planning,
              estimating, and coordination etc. Creating a model after the design is complete
              adds cost and time to the project, but it may be justified by the advantages of
              using it for construction planning and detailed design by mechanical, plumb-
              ing, other subs and fabricators, design change resolution, procurement, etc.
              If the members of the project team use different modeling tools, then tools
              for moving the models from one environment to another or combining these
              models are needed. This can add complexity and introduce potential errors
              to the project. Such problems can be reduced by using IFC standards for
              exchanging data. Another approach is to use a model server that communicates
              with all BIM applications through IFC or proprietary standards. A number of
              the case studies presented in Chapter 9 provide background for this issue.




c01.indd Sec6:21                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:51:54 PM
          22 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                1.7.2 Legal Changes to Documentation Ownership
                                      and Production
                                Legal concerns are presenting challanges, with respect to who owns the multi-
                                ple design, fabrication, analysis, and construction datasets, who pays for them,
                                and who is responsible for their accuracy. These issues are being addressed by
                                practioners through BIM use on projects. As owners learn more about the
                                advantages of BIM, they will likely require a building model to support opera-
                                tions, maintenance, and subsequent renovations. Professional groups, such as
                                the AIA and AGC, are developing guidelines for contractual language to cover
                                issues raised by the use of BIM technology.


                                1.7.3 Changes in Practice and Use of Information
                                The use of BIM will also encourage the integration of construction knowledge
                                earlier in the design process. Integrated design-build firms capable of coordi-
                                nating all phases of the design and incorporating construction knowledge from
                                the outset will benefit the most. Contracting arrangements that require and
                                facilitate good collaboration will provide greater advantages to owners when
                                BIM is used. The most significant change that companies face when implement-
                                ing BIM technology is using a shared building model as the basis of all work
                                processes and for collaboration. This transformation will require time and edu-
                                cation, as is true of all significant changes in technology and work processes.


                                1.7.4 Implementation Issues
                                Replacing a 2D or 3D CAD environment with a BIM system involves far more
                                than acquiring software, training, and upgrading hardware. Effective use of BIM
                                requires that changes be made to almost every aspect of a firm’s business (not
                                just doing the same things in a new way). It requires a thorough understanding
                                and a plan for implementation before the conversion can begin. While the spe-
                                cific changes for each firm will depend on their sector(s) of AEC activity, the
                                general steps that need to be considered are similar and include the following:

                                    • Assign top level management responsibility for developing a BIM
                                      adoption plan that covers all aspects of the firm’s business and how the
                                      proposed changes will impact both internal departments and outside
                                      partners and clients.
                                    • Create an internal team of key managers responsible for implementing
                                      the plan, with cost, time, and performance budgets to guide their
                                      performance.




c01.indd Sec6:22                                                                                             12/19/07 1:51:54 PM
                                                            1.8 Future of Designing and Building with BIM (Chapter 8)    23

                  • Start using the BIM system on one or two smaller (perhaps already
                    completed) projects in parallel with existing technology and produce
                    traditional documents from the building model. This will help reveal
                    where there are deficits in the building objects, in output capabilities, in
                    links to analysis programs, etc. It will also provide educational opportu-
                    nities for leadership staff.
                  • Use initial results to educate and guide continued adoption of BIM soft-
                    ware and additional staff training. Keep senior management apprised of
                    progress, problems, insights, etc.
                  • Extend the use of BIM to new projects and begin working with outside
                    members of the project teams in new collaborative approaches that
                    allow early integration and sharing of knowledge using the building
                    model.
                  • Continue to integrate BIM capabilities into all aspects of the firm’s func-
                    tions and reflect these new business processes in contractual documents
                    with clients and business partners.
                  • Periodically re-plan the BIM implementation process to reflect the ben-
                    efits and problems observed thus far, and set new goals for performance,
                    time, and cost. Continue to extend BIM-facilitated changes to new
                    locations and functions within the firm.

                  In Chapters 4 through 7, where specific applications of BIM over the life-
              cycle of a building are discussed, additional adoption guidelines specific to
              each party involved in the building process are reviewed.



                   1.8 FUTURE OF DESIGNING AND BUILDING WITH
                       BIM (CHAPTER 8)

              Chapter 8 describes the authors’ views of how BIM technology will evolve and
              what impacts it is likely to have on the future AEC industry and to society at
              large. There are comments on the near-term future (up to 2012) and the long-
              term future (up to 2020). We also discuss the kinds of research that will be
              relevant to support these trends.
                   It is rather straightforward to anticipate near-term impacts. For the most
              part, they are extrapolations of current trends. Projections over a longer period
              are those that to us seem likely, given our knowledge of the AEC industry and
              BIM technology. Beyond that, it is difficult to make useful projections.




c01.indd 23                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:51:54 PM
          24 Chapter 1 BIM Handbook Introduction

                                     1.9 CASE STUDIES (CHAPTER 9)

                                Chapter 9 presents ten case studies that illustrate how BIM technology and its
                                associated work processes are being used today. These cover the entire range
                                of the building lifecycle, although most focus on the design and construction
                                phases (with extensive illustration of offsite fabrication building models). For
                                the reader who is anxious to “dive right in” and get a first-hand view of BIM,
                                these case histories are a good place to start.




                                  Chapter One Discussion Questions
                                               1. What is BIM and how does it differ from 3D modeling?
                                               2. What are some of the significant problems associated with
                                                  the use of 2D CAD, and how do they waste resources and
                                                  time during both the design and construction phases as
                                                  compared to BIM-enabled processes?
                                               3. Why has the construction industry not been able to over-
                                                  come the impact of these problems on field labor productiv-
                                                  ity, despite the many advances in construction technology?
                                               4. What changes in the design and construction process are
                                                  needed to enable productive use of BIM technology?
                                               5. How do parametric rules associated with the objects in
                                                  BIM improve the design and construction process?
                                               6. What are the limitations that can be anticipated with the
                                                  generic object libraries that come with BIM systems?
                                               7. Why does the design-bid-build business process make it
                                                  very difficult to achieve the full benefits that BIM provides
                                                  during design or construction?
                                               8. What kind of legal problems can be anticipated as a
                                                  result of using BIM with an integrated project team?
                                               9. What techniques are available for integrating design
                                                  analysis applications with the building model developed
                                                  by the architect?




c01.indd 24                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:51:55 PM
              CHAPTER                       2
              BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling



                     2.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

              This chapter provides an overview of the primary technology that distinguishes
              BIM design applications from other CAD systems. Object-based parametric
              modeling was originally developed in the 1980s. It does not represent objects
              with fixed geometry and properties. Rather, it represents objects by parame-
              ters and rules that determine the geometry as well as some non-geometric
              properties and features. The parameters and rules allow the objects to auto-
              matically update according to user control or changing contexts. In other
              industries, companies use parametric modeling to develop their own object
              representations and to reflect corporate knowledge and best practices. In
              architecture, BIM software companies have pre-defined a set of base building
              object families for users, which may be extended, modified, or added to.
              An object family allows for the creation of any number of object instances,
              with forms that are dependent on parameters and relationships with other
              objects. Companies should have the capability of developing user-defined
              parametric objects and corporate object libraries for customized quality
              control and to establish their own best practices. Custom parametric objects
              allow for the modeling of complex geometries, which were previously not
              possible or simply impractical. Object attributes are needed to interface with
              analyses, cost estimations, and other applications, but these attributes must
              first be defined by the firm or user.
                   Current BIM tools vary in many ways: in the sophistication of their prede-
              fined base objects; in the ease with which users can define new object families;

              BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
              Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   25



c02.indd 25                                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:53:12 PM
          26 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 in the methods of updating objects; in ease of use; in the types of surfaces that
                                 can be used; in the capabilities for drawing generation; in their ability to handle
                                 large numbers of objects and their interfaces with other software.
                                       Most architectural BIM design tools let users mix 3D modeled objects with
                                 2D drawn sections, allowing users to determine the level of 3D detailing while
                                 still being able to produce complete drawings. Objects drawn in 2D are not
                                 automatically included in bills of material, analyses, and other BIM-enabled
                                 applications. Fabrication-level BIM tools, alternatively, typically represent
                                 every object fully in 3D. The level of 3D modeling is a major variable within
                                 different BIM practices.
                                       This chapter provides an overall review of the major BIM model genera-
                                 tion tools and some functional distinctions that can be used for assessing and
                                 selecting among them.



                                      2.1 HISTORY OF BUILDING MODELING TECHNOLOGY

                                 2.1.1 Early 3D Modeling of Buildings
                                 The modeling of 3D geometry was a broad research goal that had many poten-
                                 tial uses including movies, design, and eventually games. The ability to repre-
                                 sent a fixed set of polyhedral forms—shapes defined by a volume enclosing a
                                 set of surfaces—for viewing purposes was developed in the late 1960s and
                                 later led to the first computer-graphics film, Tron (in 1987). These early poly-
                                 hedral forms could be used for composing an image but not for designing more
                                 complex shapes. In 1973, the easy creation and editing of arbitrary 3D solid
                                 shapes was developed separately by three groups, Ian Braid at Cambridge
                                 University, Bruce Baumgart at Stanford, and Ari Requicha and Herb Voelcker
                                 at the University of Rochester (Eastman1999; Chapter 2). Known as solid
                                 modeling, these efforts produced the first generation of practical 3D modeling
                                 design tools.
                                      Two forms of solid modeling were developed and competed for supremacy.
                                 The boundary representation approach (B-rep) defined shapes using operations of
                                 union, intersection, and subtraction—called Boolean operations—on multiple
                                 polyhedral shapes and also utilized refining operations, such as chamfering, slicing,
                                 or moving a hole within a single shape. A small set of such operators is shown in
                                 Figure 2-1. The sophisticated editing systems developed from combining these
                                 primitive shapes and the Boolean operators allowed generation of a set of surfaces
                                 that together were guaranteed to enclose a volume.
                                      In contrast, Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG) represented a shape as a
                                 tree of operations and initially relied on diverse methods for assessing the final




c02.indd 26                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:53:13 PM
                                                                        2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    27

                                                                                                    FIGURE 2-1
                                                                                                    A set of primitive
                                                                                                    shapes and
                                                                                                    constructive solid
                                                                                                    geometry operators.




              shape. An example is shown in Figure 2-2. Later, these two methods merged,
              allowing for editing within the CSG tree (sometimes called the unevaluated
              shape) and also changing the shape through the use of general-purpose B-rep
              (called the evaluated shape). Objects could be edited and regenerated on
              demand. Figure 2-2 depicts a CSG tree, the unevaluated shapes it references,
              and the resulting evaluated shape. The result is the simplest of building shapes:
              a single shape hollowed with a single floor space with a gable roof and door
              opening. Notice that all locations and shapes can be edited via the shape
              parameters in the CSG tree, however, shape edits are limited to Boolean or
              other editing operations shown in Figure 2-1. First generation tools supported
              3D facetted and cylindrical object modeling with associated attributes, which
              allowed objects to be composed into engineering assemblies, such as engines,
              process plants, or buildings (Eastman 1975; Requicha 1980). This merged
              approach to modeling was an important precursor to modern parametric
              modeling.
                   Building modeling based on 3D solid modeling was first developed in the
              late 1970s and early 1980s. CAD systems, such as RUCAPS (which evolved
              into Sonata), TriCad, Calma, GDS (Day 2002), and university research-based
              systems at Carnegie-Mellon University and the University of Michigan devel-
              oped their basic capabilities. (For one detailed history of the development of
              CAD technology see http://mbinfo.mbdesign.net/CAD-History.htm.) This
              work was carried out in parallel with efforts in mechanical, aerospace, building
              and electrical product design, where early concepts of product modeling and
              integrated analysis and simulation were developed. Early conferences in
              computer-aided design were integrated across all areas of engineering and
              design, resulting in high levels of synergy. For example: Proceedings 7th–18th
              Annual Design Automation Conference (ACM 1969–1982); Conferences on
              Engineering and Scientific Data Management (NASA 1978–1980); Proceed-
              ings of CAD76, CAD78, CAD80 (CAD 1976,1978,1980).
                   Solid modeling CAD systems were functionally powerful but often over-
              whelmed the available computing power. Some aspects of production, such as




c02.indd 27                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:53:13 PM
          28 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

          FIGURE 2-2
          Example of a CSG
          model.
          From bottom: the
          unevaluated CSG
          tree and unevaluated
          primitive shape that
          the tree composes. Top
          right: the unevaluated
          set of primitives in the
          parameterized shape
          and location. Top left:
          the resulting evaluated
          B-rep model.




                                     drawing and report generation, were not well developed. Also, designing 3D
                                     objects was too conceptually foreign for most designers, who were more com-
                                     fortable working in 2D. The systems were also expensive, costing upward of
                                     $35,000 per seat. The manufacturing and aerospace industries saw the poten-
                                     tial benefits in terms of integrated analysis capabilities, reduction of errors, and
                                     the move toward factory automation. They worked with CAD companies to
                                     resolve the technology’s early shortcomings. Most of the building industry did
                                     not recognize these benefits. Instead, they adopted architectural drawing edi-
                                     tors, such as AutoCAD® and Microstation® that augmented the then-current




c02.indd 28                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:53:14 PM
                                                                         2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    29

              methods of working and supported the digital generation of conventional 2D
              construction documents.

              2.1.2 Object-Based Parametric Modeling
              The current generation of BIM architectural design tools, including Autodesk
              Revit® Architecture and Structure, Bentley Architecture and its associated set
              of products, the Graphisoft ArchiCAD® family, and Gehry Technology’s Digital
              Project™ as well as fabrication-level BIM tools, such as Tekla Structures, SDS/2,
              and Structureworks all grew out of the object-based parametric modeling
              capabilities developed for mechanical systems design. These concepts emerged
              as an extension of CSG and B-rep technologies, a mixture of university research
              and intense industrial development, particularly by Parametric Technologies
              Corporation® (PTC) in the 1980s. The basic idea is that shape instances and
              other properties can be defined and controlled according to a hierarchy of
              parameters at the assembly and sub-assembly levels, as well as at an individual
              object level. Some of the parameters depend on user-defined values. Others
              depend on fixed values, and still others are taken from or relative to other
              shapes. The shapes can be 2D or 3D.
                   In parametric design, instead of designing an instance of a building ele-
              ment like a wall or door, a designer defines a model family or element class,
              which is a set of relations and rules to control the parameters by which element
              instances can be generated but will each vary according to their context.
              Objects are defined using parameters involving distances, angles, and rules like
              attached to, parallel to, and distance from. These relations allow each instance
              of an element class to vary according to its own parameter settings and contex-
              tual relations. Alternatively, the rules can be defined as requirements that the
              design must satisfy, allowing the designer to make changes while the rules
              check and update details to keep the design element legal and warning the user
              if these definitions are not met. Object-based parametric modeling supports
              both interpretations.
                   While in traditional 3D CAD every aspect of an element’s geometry must
              be edited manually by users, the shape and assembly geometry in a parametric
              modeler automatically adjusts to changes in context and to high-level user
              controls.
                   One way of understanding how parametric modeling works is by
              examining the structure of a wall family, including its shape attributes and
              relations, as shown in Figure 2-3. We call it a wall family, because it is capable
              of generating many instances of its type in different locations and with varied
              parameters. While a wall family may focus on straight and vertical walls,
              varied geometric capabilities are sometimes desired, including those with




c02.indd 29                                                                                                            12/19/07 1:53:19 PM
          30 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

          FIGURE 2-3
          Conceptual structure
          of a wall-object
          family, with various
          edges associated with
          bounding surfaces.




                                  curved and non-vertical surfaces. A wall shape is a volume bounded by multi-
                                  ple connected faces, some defined by context and others defined by explicit
                                  values. For most walls, the thickness is defined explicitly as two offsets from
                                  the wall control line, based on a nominal thickness or the type of construction.
                                  Walls with tapered or varying thicknesses have multiple offsets or possibly a
                                  vertical profile. The wall’s elevation shape is defined by one or more base floor
                                  planes; its top face may be an explicit height or possibly defined by a set of
                                  adjacent planes (as shown here). The wall ends are defined by the wall’s inter-
                                  section, having either a fixed endpoint (freestanding) or associations with
                                  other walls. The control line of the wall (here shown along the bottom) has a
                                  start and end point, so the wall does too. A wall is associated with all the
                                  object instances that bound it and the multiple spaces it separates.
                                       Door or window openings have placement points defined by a length along
                                  the wall from one of its endpoints to a side or to the center of the opening with
                                  its required parameters. These openings are located in the coordinate system of
                                  the wall, so they move as a unit. A wall will adjust its ends by moving, growing,
                                  or shrinking as the floor-plan layout changes, with windows and doors also
                                  moving and updating. Any time one or more surfaces of the bounding wall
                                  changes, the wall automatically updates to retain the intent of its original
                                  layout.
                                       A well-crafted definition of a parametric wall must address a range of
                                  special conditions. These include:

                                      • The door and window locations must check that they lie completely
                                        within the wall and do not overlap each other or extend beyond the wall
                                        boundaries. They typically display a warning if these conditions fail.




c02.indd 30                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:53:19 PM
                                                                           2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    31

                  • A wall control line may be straight or curved, allowing the wall to take
                    varied shapes.
                  • A wall may intersect floor, ceiling, or side walls, any of which are made
                    up of multiple surfaces and result in a more complex wall shape.
                  • Walls may have tapered sections, if they are made of concrete or other
                    malleable materials.
                  • Walls made up of mixed types of construction and finishes may change
                    within segments of a wall.

                  As these conditions suggest, significant care must be taken to define even
              a generic wall. It is common for a parametric building class to have over one
              hundred low-level rules for its definition. These rules also explain why users
              may encounter problems with unusual wall layouts—because they are not cov-
              ered by the built-in rules—and how easy it is to define wall definitions that may
              be inadvertently limited.
                  For example, take the clerestory wall and the windows set within it shown
              in Figure 2-4. In this case, the wall must be placed on a non-horizontal floor
              plane. Also, the walls that trim the clerestory wall ends are not on the same
              base-plane as the wall being trimmed. Early BIM modeling tools could not deal
              with this combination of conditions.
                  In Figure 2-5, we present a simple sequence of editing operations for
              the schematic design of a small theater. The upper left view in Figure 2-5
              shows the theater with two side walls angling inward toward the stage and a
              wall separating the back of the theater from the lobby. In terms of boundary
              associations, the theater side walls are initially attached to the ceiling and floor,
              and their ends are attached to the rear of the lobby and front wall of the stage.
              The sloping theater floor is attached to the side walls of the building.
                  In Figure 2-5, upper right, the lobby side walls are detached from the rear
              wall and moved part-way open, allowing the lobby to flow around their edges.



                                                                                                       FIGURE 2-4
                                                                                                       A clerestory wall in
                                                                                                       a ceiling that has
                                                                                                       different parametric
                                                                                                       modeling requirements
                                                                                                       than most walls.




c02.indd 31                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:53:20 PM
          32 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

          FIGURE 2-5
          The conceptual layout
          of a small theater with
          lobby at the rear and
          two side aisles.
          The sloped theater
          house is in the middle.
          The rear of the side
          walls is edited, then the
          angle of the side walls is
          adjusted. Last the rear
          of the theater is moved
          forward.




                                       Notice that the ceiling arc is automatically trimmed. In the lower left figure, the
                                       side walls of the theater are re-angled, with the theater rear wall automatically
                                       trimmed to abut the walls of the theater. In lower right figure, the back wall is
                                       moved forward, making the theater shallower. The back wall automatically
                                       shortens to maintain its abutment to the side walls, and the theater and lobby
                                       floor automatically adjust to remain abutted to the back wall. The significant
                                       point is that the adjustments of the side walls to the roof and slopped theater
                                       floor are completely automatic. Once the initial spatial configuration is defined,
                                       it is possible to make quick edits and updates. Notice that these parametric
                                       modeling capabilities go far beyond those offered in previous CSG-based CAD
                                       systems. They support automatic updating of a layout and the preservation of
                                       relations set by the designer. These tools can be extremely productive.

                                       2.1.3 Parametric Modeling of Buildings
                                       In manufacturing, parametric modeling has been used by companies to embed
                                       design, engineering, and manufacturing rules within the parametric models of
                                       their products. For example, when Boeing undertook the design of the 777,
                                       they defined the rules by which their airplane interiors were to be defined,
                                       for looks, fabrication, and assembly. They fine-tuned the outside shape for




c02.indd 32                                                                                                            12/19/07 1:53:21 PM
                                                                        2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    33

              aerodynamic performance through many hundreds of airflow simulations—
              called Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)—linked to allow for many alter-
              native shapes and parametric adjustments. They pre-assembled the airplane
              virtually in order to eliminate more than 6,000 change requests and to achieve a
              90% reduction in spatial re-work. It is estimated that Boeing invested more
              than $1 billion dollars to purchase and set up their parametric modeling system
              for the 777 family of planes. A good overview of the Boeing effort, its strengths
              and shortcomings, is available (CalTech 1997).
                   In a similar way, the John Deere company, working with LMS of Belgium,
              defined how they wanted their tractors to be constructed. Various models were
              developed based on John Deere’s design-for-manufacturing (DfM) rules. (www.
              lmsintl.com/virtuallab). Using parametric modeling, companies usually define
              how their object families are to be designed and structured, how they can be
              varied parametrically and related into assemblies based on function, and other
              production criteria. In these cases, the companies are embedding corporate
              knowledge based on past efforts on design, production, assembly, and mainte-
              nance concerning what works and what does not. This is especially worthwhile
              when a company produces many variations of a product. This is the standard
              practice in large aerospace, manufacturing, and electronics companies.
                   Conceptually, building information modeling (BIM) tools are object-based
              parametric models with a predefined set of object families, each having behav-
              iors programmed within them, as outlined above. A fairly complete listing of
              the pre-defined object families provided by major BIM architectural design
              tools is given in Table 2-1 (as of early 2007). These are the sets of pre-defined
              object families that can be readily applied to building designs in each system.
                   A building is an assembly object defined within a BIM system. A building
              model configuration is defined by the user as a dimensionally-controlled para-
              metric structure, using grids, floor levels, and other global reference planes.
              Alternatively, these can simply be floor planes, wall centerlines, or a combina-
              tion of them. Together with their embedded object instances and parametric
              settings, the model configuration defines an instance of the building.
                   In addition to vendor-provided object families, a number of Web sites
              make additional object families available for downloading and use. These are
              the modern equivalent of drafting block libraries that were available for early
              2D drafting systems – but of course they are much more useful and powerful.
              Most of these are generic objects, but a growing capability is the provision of
              models of specific products. These are discussed in Section 5.4.2 and some
              of the sites are listed.
                   There are many detailed differences between the specially-developed para-
              metric modeling tools used in BIM and those used in other industries. Buildings




c02.indd 33                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:53:22 PM
          34 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 Table 2-1     The built-in base object families in major BIM tools.

                                                                          Bentley           Revit
                                    BIM Tool
                                                         ArchiCAD       Architecture       Building       Digital Project
                                  Base Objects              v10             v8.1            v9.1               r5.v3

                                  Solid model w/     •                   •             •                  •
                                  features

                                  Site model         •                   •             •
                                                                         (Contoured    (Toposurface)
                                                                         model)

                                  Space definition   Manual              Manual        Room               Room
                                                                                       (automatic)        (automatic)

                                  Wall               •                   •             •                  •

                                  Column             •                   •             •                  •

                                  Door               •                   •             •                  •

                                  Window             •                   •             •                  •

                                  Roof               •                   •             •                  Custom object

                                  Stair              •                   •             •                  Custom object

                                  Slab               •                   •             Floor              •

                                  Wall End           •                   •

                                  Zone               •                   Ceiling       Ceiling

                                  Beam               •                                                    •

                                  Unique Objects     Skylight, Corner    Shaft         Floor, Curtain     Opening,
                                  for each System    window                            System, Railing,   Contour
                                                                                       Mullion, Brace,    opening
                                                                                       Foundation




                                 are composed of a very large number of simple parts. Its regeneration
                                 dependencies are more predictable than for general mechanical design systems;
                                 however, the amount of information in even a medium-sized building at
                                 construction-level detail can cause performance problems in even the most
                                 high-end personal computers. Another difference is that there is a broad set of
                                 standard practices and codes that can be readily adapted and embedded to
                                 define object behaviors. These differences have resulted in only a few general-
                                 purpose parametric modeling tools being adapted and used for Building Infor-
                                 mation Modeling.




c02.indd 34                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:22 PM
                                                                          2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    35

                   One functional aspect of BIM design tools that is different from those in
              other industries is their need to explicitly represent the space enclosed by build-
              ing elements. Environmentally conditioned building space is a primary function
              of a building. The shape, volume, surfaces, and properties of an interior space
              are a critical aspect of a building. Previous CAD systems were not good at
              representing space explicitly. It was generally defined implicitly, as what was
              left between walls, floor, and the ceiling. We owe thanks to the General Serv-
              ices Administration (GSA) for demanding that BIM design tools be capable of
              deriving ANSI/BOMA space volumes beginning in 2007. This capability was
              conveniently overlooked in most BIM systems until GSA mandated it in the
              GSA BIM Guide, stating that the amount of space produced in government
              buildings must be accurately assessed. Today, all BIM design tools provide this
              capability. The GSA BIM Guide is available online at www.gsa.gov/bim. The
              GSA expands its information requirements annually.
                   Parametric modeling is a critical productivity capability, allowing low-level
              changes to update automatically. It is fair to say that 3D modeling would not
              be productive in building design and production without the automatic update
              features made possible by parametric capabilities. Each BIM tool varies with
              regards to the parametric object families it provides, the rules embedded within
              it, and the resulting design behavior. These important differences are taken up
              in Section 2.2.

              2.1.4 User-Defined Parametric Objects
              While each BIM design tool has a growing set of pre-defined parametric object
              families (see Table 2-1), these are complete only for the most standard types of
              construction. They are incomplete in two ways:

                  • Their built-in assumptions about design behavior for the pre-defined
                    object families are normative and do not address some special cases
                    encountered in real world contexts.
                  • The base object families include the most commonly encountered ones
                    but omit those needed in many special types of construction and build-
                    ing types.

                  Another perspective is that the base object families in a BIM design tool
              represent standard practice, as does Ramsey and Sleeper’s Architectural
              Graphic Standards (Ramsey et al. 2000). While standard practice reflects
              industry conventions, best practice reflects the adjustments to details, the
              experience a designer or firm has acquired with respect to how elements are to
              be detailed. Best practices distinguish the quality of design offered by most
              successful design practices. That is, the predefined objects that come with a




c02.indd 35                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:23 PM
          36 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                    BIM design tool capture design conventions rather than expertise. Any firm
                                    that considers itself BIM-capable should have the ability to define its own
                                    libraries of custom parametric object families.
                                         All BIM model generation tools support the definition of custom object
                                    families. If a needed parametric object family does not exist in the BIM tool,
                                    the design and engineering team has the option of either laying out the object
                                    instance using fixed B-rep or CSG geometry and remembering to update these
                                    details manually or alternatively defining a new parametric object family that
                                    incorporates the appropriate design rules and automatic updating behaviors.
                                    This embedded knowledge captures, for example, how to frame a particular
                                    style of stairway, how to detail the joining of different materials like steel and
                                    concrete or synthetic stucco and aluminum extrusions. These objects, once cre-
                                    ated, can be used in any project in which they are embedded. Clearly, the defi-
                                    nition of details is an industry-wide undertaking that defines standard
                                    construction practices and a firm-level activity that captures best practice.
                                    Detailing is what academics such as Kenneth Frampton have referred to as the
                                    tectonics of construction (Frampton et al. 1996). It is an essential aspect of
                                    the art and craft of architecture.
                                         If a firm frequently works with some building type involving special object
                                    families, the added labor to define these parametrically is easily justified. They
                                    provide automatic insertion of company best practice in the various contexts
                                    found in different projects. These may be at a high-level for layouts, or for
                                    detailing. They may be at various levels of sophistication.
                                         Stadium seating is an example that justifies parametric layouts. It involves
                                    constraints that deal with seating capacity and sight lines. An example is shown
                                    in Figure 2-6. The two slightly different seating configurations at the top were

          FIGURE 2-6
          Custom parametric
          model of stadium
          seating.
          Courtesy of HOK Sports.




c02.indd 36                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:53:23 PM
                                                                          2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    37

              generated from the same object model, which defines a section profile in terms
              of seating tread width, sightline target, and visual clearance above the tread
              below. The extruded section is then swept along a three-part path. The seating
              on the right allows for sightlines at closer points to the playing field. The dialog
              box for the sightline settings is shown at the bottom. This layout type is straight-
              forward and relies on older solid modeling capabilities. This example was
              implemented in Architectural Desktop.
                   A more elaborate custom parametric model for the shell of a stadium is
              shown in Figure 2-7 and Figure 2-8. The project is for a 50,000-seat soccer and
              rugby stadium in Dublin, Ireland and was undertaken by HOK Sports. The
              initial stadium geometry and form was developed through a series of models in
              Rhino. Defined by a set of site constraints and sightline regulations, a paramet-
              ric model was constructed in Bentley’s Generative Components, using an
              Excel-based file to store the geometric information. This data was used as a
              path between Buro Happold and HOK Sports, allowing Buro Happold to
              develop a roof structure and HOK to develop a facade and roofing system,
              both in Generative Components. Having established a series of rules for the
              parametric model, both offices worked to develop the construction informa-
              tion using Generative Components and Excel (as a coordination tool), which is


                                                                                                      FIGURE 2-7
                                                                                                      The control
                                                                                                      curves generated
                                                                                                      in Generative
                                                                                                      Components.
                                                                                                      Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                      of HOK sports.




c02.indd 37                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:24 PM
          38 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

          FIGURE 2-8
          The detail layout of the
          stadium shell and its
          rendering.
          Courtesy of HOK Sports.




                                     shown in the top of Figure 2-8. HOK Sports further developed the model in
                                     Bentley’s Generative Components for the production of a louvered facade system,
                                     which allowed ventilation through the stadium shell, as shown. A rendering of
                                     the stadium’s final design is also shown in the lower part of Figure 2-8. More
                                     adventurous architectural firms are using such customized parametric models to
                                     lay out and manage complex geometries for single projects, resulting in a new
                                     range of building forms that were hardly possible before.
                                          The standard method for defining most custom parametric object families is
                                     by using a sketch tool module that is part of all parametric modeling tools. These




c02.indd 38                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:53:25 PM
                                                                          2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    39

              are primarily used for defining swept shapes. Swept shapes include: extruded
              profiles, such as steel members; shapes with changing cross sections, such as
              ductwork fittings; shapes of rotation, such as to sweep a dome section profile
              around a circle; and other shapes. Sweeps are the most general tool for creating
              custom shapes. Combined with relations to other objects and Boolean opera-
              tions, a sketch tools allows constructing almost any shape family.
                   The sketch tool allows a user to composed of draw a 2D closed section
              made up of lines, arcs or higher level curves between points, not necessarily to
              scale, then dimension the sketch and apply other rules to reflect the design intent
              in terms of the parametric rules. A swept surface may be defined with multiple
              profiles, either interpolating between them or in some cases with step changes.
              Four examples from different BIM design tools are shown in Figure 2-9. Each
              tool has a different vocabulary of rules and constraints that can be applied to a
              sketch and the operations that can be associated with its parametric behavior.
                   When developing custom object families using B-rep or parameters, it is
              important that the objects carry the attributes necessary for the various assess-
              ments that the object family’s instances must support, such as cost estimation
              and structural or energy analyses. These attributes are also derived parametri-
              cally. These issues are taken up in Section 2.2.2.




                                                                                                      FIGURE 2-9
                                                                                                      A figure-eight sketch,
                                                                                                      swept along a path
                                                                                                      made up of an arc and
                                                                                                      a straight segment to
                                                                                                      create a complex form.
                                                                                                      Examples are generated
                                                                                                      using all four of the
                                                                                                      major BIM design tools.




c02.indd 39                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:26 PM
          40 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 2.1.5 Design-for-Construction
                                 While all BIM tools allow users to assign layers to a wall section in terms of a
                                 2D section, some architectural BIM authoring tools include parametric layout
                                 of nested assemblies of objects, such as stud framing, within generic walls.
                                 This allows generation of the detailed framing and derivation of a cut lumber
                                 schedule, reducing waste and allowing for faster erection of wood or metal
                                 stud framed structures. In large-scale structures, similar framing and structural
                                 layout options are necessary extensions for fabrication. In these cases, objects
                                 and rules deal with objects as parts and their composition into a system –
                                 structural, electrical, piping, etc. In the more complex cases, each of the
                                 system’s parts are then internally composed of their constituent parts, such as
                                 the wood framing, or steel reinforcing in concrete.
                                      BIM tools for building design focus on architectural-level objects, but a
                                 different set of authoring tools have been developed for modeling at the fabri-
                                 cation level. These tools provide different object families for embedding differ-
                                 ent types of expertise. Early examples of such packages were developed for
                                 steel fabrication, such as Design Data’s SDS/2®, Tekla’s X-steel®, and AceCad’s
                                 StruCad®. Initially, these were simple 3D layout systems with predefined para-
                                 metric object families for connections, copes that trim members around join-
                                 ing steel sections, and other editing operations. These capabilities were later
                                 enhanced to support automatic design based on loads, connections, and mem-
                                 bers. With associated CNC cutting and drilling machines, these systems have
                                 become an integral part of automated steel fabrication. In a similar manner,
                                 systems have been developed for precast concrete, reinforced concrete, metal
                                 ductwork, piping, and other building systems.
                                      Recent advances have been made in concrete engineering with cast-in-place
                                 and precast concrete. Figure 2-10 shows precast reinforcing embedded to meet
                                 structural requirements. The layout automatically adjusts to the section size
                                 and to the layout of columns and beams. It adjusts for reinforcing around con-
                                 nections, irregular sections, and cut-outs. Parametric modeling operations can
                                 include shape subtraction and addition operations that create reveals, notches,
                                 bull-noses, and cut-outs defined by the placement of other parts. A precast
                                 architectural facade example is shown in Figure 2-11, in terms of the 3D model
                                 of the piece and the piece mark (the drawing that describes it). Each building
                                 sub-system requires its own set of parametric object families and rules for
                                 managing the layout of the system; the rules define the default behavior of each
                                 object within the system.
                                      Parametric rules are beginning to encode large amounts of modeling exper-
                                 tise within each building system domain regarding how parts should be laid
                                 out and detailed. Current parametric object families provided as base objects




c02.indd 40                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:53:31 PM
                                                                        2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology       41

                                                                                                    FIGURE 2-10
                                                                                                    Automated reinforcing
                                                                                                    layout and connections
                                                                                                    for precast concrete in
                                                                                                    Tekla Structures (See
                                                                                                    color insert for full color
                                                                                                    figure).




              in BIM tools provide similar information to that provided by Architectural
              Graphic Standards (Ramsey et al. 2000), however, in a form that supports
              automatic piece definition, layout, connection, and detailing within the compu-
              ter. More ambitious efforts are now underway among several construction
              material associations, such as the American Institute of Steel Construction’s
              Steel Design Guide (AISC 2007), which now encompasses 21 volumes, and
              the Precast/Pre-stressed Concrete Institute’s PCI Design Handbook (PCI
              2004). Consortiums of members within these organizations have worked
              together to draft specifications for defining the layout and behaviors of objects
              in precast and steel design. Use of these tools by fabricators is discussed in
              more detail in Chapter 7. It should be noted that despite the fact that fabrica-
              tors have had a direct hand in defining these base object families and default
              behaviors, they often need to be further customized so that detailing embed-
              ded in the software reflects the company’s engineering practices. It should
              also be noted that architects have not yet taken this road but have relied on
              BIM design tool developers to define their base object families. Eventually,
              design handbooks will be delivered in this way, as a set of parametric models
              and rules.
                   In fabrication modeling, detailers refine their parametric objects for well
              understood reasons: such as to minimize labor, to achieve a particular visual
              appearance, to reduce the mixing of different types of work crews, or to




c02.indd 41                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:32 PM
          42 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

          FIGURE 2-11
          A parametric model of
          an architectural precast
          panel and a piecemark
          drawing of it.
          Image provided courtesy
          of High Concrete
          Structures.




                                     minimize the types or sizes of materials. Standard design-guide implementa-
                                     tions typically address one of multiple acceptable approaches for detailing. In
                                     some cases, various objectives can be realized using standard detailing prac-
                                     tices. In other circumstances, these detailing practices can be overridden.




c02.indd 42                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:53:33 PM
                                                                          2.1 History of Building Modeling Technology    43

              A company’s best practices or standard interfacing for a particular piece of
              fabrication equipment may require further customization.

              2.1.6 Object-Based CAD Systems
              Several CAD systems in use today are not general purpose parametric mode-
              ling-based BIM tools such as those that have been reviewed up to this point.
              Rather, they are traditional B-rep modelers possibly with a CSG-based con-
              struction tree and a given library of object classes. AutoCAD®-based construc-
              tion-level modeling tools, such as CADPipe, CADDUCT, and Architectural
              Desktop (ADT) are examples of older software technologies. Some Bentley
              products with fixed vocabularies for object classes are also of this type. Within
              these CAD system environments, users can select, parametrically size, and lay
              out 3D objects with associated attributes. These object instances and attributes
              can be exported and used in other applications, such as for bills of material,
              fabrication, and other uses.
                   These systems work well when there is a fixed set of object classes to be
              composed using fixed rules. Appropriate applications include: piping, duct-
              work, and cable tray systems for electrical layout. ADT was being developed in
              this way by Autodesk, incrementally extending the object classes it could model
              to cover those most commonly encountered in building. ADT also supports
              custom-defined extrusions and other B-rep shapes but does not support user
              defined interactions among object instances. New object classes are added to
              these systems through the ARX or MDL programming language interfaces.
                   One critical difference with BIM is that users can define much more
              complex structures of object families and relations among them than is possi-
              ble with 3D CAD, without undertaking programming-level software develop-
              ment. With BIM, a curtain-wall system attached to columns and floor slabs can
              be defined from scratch by a knowledgeable non-programmer. Such an endeavor
              would require the development of a major application extension in 3D CAD.
                   Another fundamental difference is that in a parametric modeler, users can
              define custom object families and relate them to existing objects or control
              grids, also without resorting to computer programming. These new capabilities
              allow organizations to define object families in their own way and to support
              their own methods of detailing and layout. Such capabilities were critical for
              manufacturing applications, such as those that dealt with divergent fabrication
              processes and product designs. In building, these capabilities are similarly
              well-utilized by fabrication-level tools, such as those that allow steel fabricators
              to define connection details and precast and cast-in-place concrete detailers to
              define connection and reinforcing layouts. Parametric modeling transforms
              modeling from a geometric design tool to a knowledge embedding tool. The




c02.indd 43                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:34 PM
          44 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 implications of this capability in building design and construction are only
                                 beginning to be explored.



                                      2.2 VARIED CAPABILITIES OF PARAMETRIC
                                          MODELERS

                                 In general, the internal structure of an object instance as defined within a para-
                                 metric modeling system is a directed graph, where the nodes are object families
                                 with parameters or operations that construct or modify an object and links in
                                 the graph reference relations between nodes. At this level, systems vary in how
                                 features are pre-defined and embedded in an object (such as a steel connection)
                                 and whether parametric objects can be nested into a larger parametric assembly
                                 and then further into even larger assemblies, as needed. Some systems offer the
                                 option of making the parametric graph visible for editing. Early parametric
                                 modeling systems rely on a full re-building of a part-and-assembly model by
                                 traversing the complete graph in response to model edits. Modern parametric
                                 modeling systems internally mark where edits are made and only regenerate
                                 affected parts of the model’s graph, minimizing the update sequence. Some
                                 systems allow for the optimization of the structure’s update graph based on
                                 changes made and can vary the sequence of regeneration. Other systems, called
                                 variational systems, use simultaneous equations to solve equations (Anderl
                                 et al. 1996). These capabilities all result in varied performance and scalability for
                                 dealing with projects involving a large number of object instances and rules.
                                      The range of rules that can be embedded in a parametric graph determines
                                 the generality of the system. Parametric object families are defined using
                                 parameters involving distances, angles, and rules, such as attached to, parallel
                                 to, and distance from. Most allow ‘if-then’ conditions. Their definition is a
                                 complex undertaking, embedding knowledge about how they should behave in
                                 different contexts. If-then conditions replace one object family or design fea-
                                 ture with another, based on the test result of some condition. These are used in
                                 structural detailing, for example, to select the desired connection type, depend-
                                 ing upon loads and the members being connected. Such rules are also needed
                                 to effectively lay out plumbing and duct runs, by automatically inserting the
                                 correctly specified elbows and tees.
                                      Some BIM design tools support parametric relations to complex curves
                                 and surfaces, such as splines and non-uniform B-splines (NURBS). These tools
                                 allow complex curved shapes to be defined and controlled similarly to other
                                 types of geometry. Several major BIM tools on the market have not included
                                 these capabilities, possibly for performance or reliability reasons.




c02.indd 44                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:53:35 PM
                                                                       2.2 Varied Capabilities of Parametric Modelers    45

                   The definition of parametric objects also provides guidelines for their later
              dimensioning in drawings. If windows are placed in a wall according to the
              offset from the wall-end to the center of the window, the default dimensioning
              will be done this way in later drawings. The wall control line and endpoint
              intersections define the placement dimension of the wall. (In some systems,
              these defaults can be overridden).
                   A basic capability of 3D parametric modeling systems is conflict detection
              of objects that spatially interfere with each other. These may be hard interfer-
              ences, such as a pipe that hits a beam, or soft interferences of objects that are
              too close together, such as reinforcing in concrete that is too close for aggre-
              gate to pass through or a steel beam or pipe that has insufficient clearance for
              insulation or a concrete cover. Objects that are automatically placed via para-
              metric rules may take interferences into account and automatically update the
              layout to avoid them. Others do not. This issue varies according to the specific
              objects being laid out and the rules embedded in them.
                   Enclosed spaces are the primary functional units realized in most building
              construction. Their area, volume, surface area composition, and often their
              shape and interior layout are among the most critical aspects for fulfilling the
              objectives of the building project. Spaces are the voids within the solid objects
              of construction and are usually derived from the bounding solids. They are
              derived in current tools in different ways: automatically defined and updated
              without intervention by the user; updated on demand; generated in plan defined
              by a polygon, then extruded to the ceiling height. These methods provide vari-
              ous levels of consistency, management by the user and accuracy. At the same
              time, space definitions contain the locations of most building functions and
              many analyses are applied to them, such as for energy, acoustic, and air flow
              simulations. While the US General Services Administration realized a first-
              level of capability in this area, this ability will become increasingly important
              for some uses discussed in Chapter 5. The capabilities of BIM design tools for
              space definition (as of early 2007) are shown in Table 2-1.
                   Parametric object modeling provides a powerful way to create and edit geom-
              etry. Without it, model generation and design would be extremely cumbersome
              and error-prone, as was found with great disappointment by the mechanical engi-
              neering community after the initial development of solid modeling. Designing a
              building that contains a million or more objects would be impractical without
              a platform that allows for effective low-level automatic design editing.

              2.2.1 Topological Structures
              When we place a wall in a parametric model of a building, we automatically
              associate the wall to its bounding surfaces, its base floor planes, the walls its




c02.indd 45                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:35 PM
          46 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 ends abut, any walls butting it, and the ceiling surfaces trimming its height.
                                 It also bounds the spaces on its two sides. When we put a window or door in the
                                 wall, we are defining a connection relation between the window and the wall.
                                 Similarly, in pipe runs, it is important to define whether connections are threaded,
                                 butt welded, or have flanges and bolts. Connections in mathematics are called
                                 topology and—distinct from geometry—are critical to the representation of a
                                 building model and one of the fundamental aspects of parametric modeling.
                                      Connections carry three important kinds of information: what can be con-
                                 nected; what the connection consists of; and how the connection is composed
                                 in response to various contexts. Some systems restrict the object types that an
                                 object can be connected to. For example, in some systems walls can connect to
                                 walls, ceilings, and floors, but a wall-edge may not connect to stairs, windows
                                 (perpendicularly), or a cabinet. Some systems encode good practice to exclude
                                 such relations. On the other hand, prohibiting them can force users to resort to
                                 work-arounds in certain special circumstances. Connections between objects
                                 can be handled in different ways in building models. The nailing of sheetrock or
                                 wood studs to a base plate are seldom detailed but are covered by a written
                                 specification. In other cases, the connection must be defined explicitly with a
                                 detail, such as the embedding of windows into precast architectural panels.
                                 (Here we use the word connection generically to include joints and other attach-
                                 ments between elements.) Topology and connections are critical aspects of a
                                 BIM tool that specify what kinds of relations can be defined in rules. They are
                                 also important as design objects and often require specification or detailing. In
                                 architectural BIM tools, connections are seldom defined as explicit elements.
                                 In fabrication-level BIM tools, they are always defined as explicit elements.

                                 2.2.2 Property and Attribute Handling
                                 Object-based parametric modeling addresses geometry and topology, but
                                 objects also need to carry a variety of properties if they are to be interpreted,
                                 analyzed, priced, and procured by other applications.
                                      Properties include: material specifications needed for fabrication, such as
                                 steel or concrete strength and bolt and weld specifications; material properties
                                 related to different performance issues such as acoustics, light reflectance, and
                                 thermal flows; properties for assemblies like wall and floor-to-ceiling systems
                                 or steel and precast concrete assemblies based on weight, structural behavior,
                                 etc; and properties for spaces such as occupancy, activities, and equipment
                                 needed for energy analysis.
                                      Properties are seldom used singularly. A lighting application requires mate-
                                 rial color, a reflection coefficient, a specular reflection exponent, and possibly a
                                 texture and bump map. For accurate energy analysis, a wall requires a different




c02.indd 46                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:53:35 PM
                                                                       2.2 Varied Capabilities of Parametric Modelers    47

              set. Thus, properties are appropriately organized into sets and associated with
              a certain function. Libraries of property sets for different objects and materials
              are an integral part of a well-developed BIM model generation tool and the
              environment in which the tool resides. The property sets are not always avail-
              able from the product vendor and often have to be approximated by a user, the
              user’s firm or from the American Society of Testing and Materials data (ASTM).
              Although organizations such as the Construction Specifications Institute are
              looking at these issues, the development of property sets for supporting a wide
              range of simulation and analysis tools has not yet been adequately addressed
              and is left to users to set up.
                   Current BIM generation tools default to a minimal set of properties for
              most objects and provide the capability of adding an extendable set. Several
              existing BIM tools provide Uniformat™ classes to associate elements for cost
              estimation. Users or an application must add properties to each relevant
              object to produce a certain type of simulation, cost estimate, or analysis and
              also must manage their appropriateness for various tasks. The management of
              property sets becomes problematic because different applications for the same
              function may require somewhat different properties and units, such as for
              energy and lighting.
                   There are at least three different ways that properties may be managed for
              a set of applications:

                  • By pre-defining them in the object libraries so they are added to the
                    design model when an object instance is created.
                  • By the user adding them as-needed for an application from a stored
                    library of property sets.
                  • By the properties being assigned automatically, as they are exported to
                    an analysis or simulation application.

                  The first alternative is good for production work involving a standard set
              of construction types but requires careful user definition for custom objects.
              Each object carries extensive property data for all relevant applications, only
              some of which may actually be used. Extra definitions may slow down an appli-
              cation’s performance and enlarge its objects’ sizes. The second alternative
              allows users to select a set of similar objects or property sets to export to an
              application. This results in a time-consuming export process. Iterated use of
              simulation tools may require the addition of properties each time the applica-
              tion is run. This would be required, for example, to examine alternative win-
              dow and wall systems for energy efficiency. The third approach keeps the design
              application light but requires the development of a comprehensive material tag




c02.indd 47                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:36 PM
          48 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 that can be used by all exporting translators to associate a property set for each
                                 object. The authors believe that this third approach is the desired long-term
                                 approach for attribute handling. The necessary object classifications and name
                                 tagging required of this approach must still be developed. Currently, multiple
                                 object tags must be developed, one for each application.
                                     The development of object property sets and appropriate object classifica-
                                 tion libraries to support different types of applications is a broad issue under
                                 consideration by the Construction Specification Institute of North America
                                 and by other national specification organizations. It is reviewed in more detail
                                 in Section 5.3.3. A comprehensive solution does not yet exist but needs to be
                                 developed to support full utilization of BIM technologies.
                                     Object libraries, representing company best practices and specific com-
                                 mercial building products, are an important component of a BIM environment.
                                 This important facility is reviewed in Section 5.4.

                                 2.2.3 Drawing Generation
                                 Even though a building model has the full geometric layout of a building and
                                 its systems—and the objects have properties and potentially specifications—
                                 drawings will continue to be required, as reports extracted from the model, for
                                 some time into the future. Existing contractual processes and work culture,
                                 while changing, are still centered on drawings, whether paper or electronic. If
                                 a BIM tool does not support effective drawing extraction and a user has to do
                                 significant manual editing to generate each set of drawings from cut sections,
                                 the benefits of BIM are significantly reduced.
                                      With building information modeling, each building object instance—its
                                 shape, properties, and placement in the model—is defined only once. From the
                                 overall arrangement of building object instances, drawings, reports, and data-
                                 sets can be extracted. Because of this non-redundant building representation,
                                 all drawings, reports, and analysis datasets are consistent if taken from the
                                 same version of the building model. This capability alone resolves a significant
                                 source of errors and guarantees internal consistency within a drawing set. With
                                 normal 2D architectural drawings, any change or edit must be transferred
                                 manually to multiple drawings by the designer, resulting in potential human
                                 errors from not updating all drawings correctly. In precast concrete construc-
                                 tion, this 2D practice has been shown to cause errors costing approximately
                                 1% of construction cost (Sacks et al. 2003).
                                      Architectural drawings do not rely on orthographic projections, as learned
                                 in high school drafting classes. Rather, drawings such as plans, sections, and
                                 elevations incorporate complex sets of conventions for recording design infor-
                                 mation graphically on sheets of paper. This includes symbolic depiction of




c02.indd 48                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:53:36 PM
                                                                        2.2 Varied Capabilities of Parametric Modelers    49

              some physical objects, dotted representation of geometry behind the section
              plane in floor-plans, and very selective dotted-line representation of hidden
              objects in front of the section plane, in addition to line-weights and annota-
              tions. Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems (MEP) are often laid out
              schematically (topologically), leaving the final layout to the contractor, after
              equipment has already been selected. These conventions require that BIM
              design tools embed a strong set of representational rules in their drawing
              extraction capabilities. In addition, drawing conventions of individual firms
              must be added to the built-in tool conventions. These issues affect both how
              the model is defined within the tool and how the tool is set up for drawing
              extraction.
                   Part of a given drawing definition is derived from how an object is defined,
              as described earlier. The object has an associated name, annotation, and in
              some cases line-weights and formats for presentation in different views that are
              carried in the object library. The placement of the object also has implications.
              If the object is placed relative to a grid intersection or wall end, that is how its
              placement will be dimensioned in the drawing. If the object is parametrically
              defined relative to other objects, such as the length of a beam placed to span
              between variably placed supports, then the drawing generator will not auto-
              matically dimension the length unless the system is told to derive the beam
              length at drawing generation time.
                   Most BIM models of buildings do not include 3D and attribute informa-
              tion for all the pieces of a building. Many are shown only in section details.
              Most BIM design tools provide the means for extracting a drawn section at
              the level of detail to which they are defined in the 3D model. The location
              of the drawn section is automatically recorded with a section-cut symbol on a
              plan or elevation as a cross-reference and the location can be moved if needed.
              The section is then detailed manually with the needed wood-blocks, extrusions,
              silicon beading, weather stripping; and associated annotations are provided in
              the fully detailed drawn section. An example is shown in Figure 2-12, with the
              figure on the left showing the extracted section and the one on the right show-
              ing the detailed section with drafted annotation. In most systems, this detail is
              associated with the section cut it was based on. When 3D elements in the sec-
              tion change, they update automatically in the section but the hand drawn
              details must be manually updated.
                   To produce drawings, each plan, section, and elevation is separately com-
              posed based on the above rules from a combination of cut 3D sections and
              aligned 2D drawn sections. They are then grouped into sheets with normal
              borders and title sheets. The sheet layouts are maintained across sessions and
              are part of the overall project data.




c02.indd 49                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:53:37 PM
          50 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

          FIGURE 2-12
          The initial section
          extracted from the
          building model (left)
          and the manually
          detailed drawing
          elaborated from the
          section (right).
          Image provided courtesy
          of Autodesk.




                                         Drawing production from a detailed 3D model has gone through a series
                                    of refinements to make it efficient and easy. Below is an ordered list of the lev-
                                    els of quality that can now be supported technically, though most systems have
                                    not realized top-level drawing generation. We start from the weakest level.

                                        1. A weak level of drawing production provides for the generation of
                                           orthographic sections cut from a 3D model, and the user manually edits
                                           the line formats and adds dimensions, details, and annotations. These
                                           details are associative. That is, as long as the section exists in the model,
                                           the annotation set-up is maintained across drawing versions. Such asso-
                                           ciation capabilities are essential for effective re-generation of drawings
                                           for multiple versions. In this case, the drawing is an elaborated report
                                           generated from the model.
                                        2. An improvement upon 1 (above) is the definition and use of drawing
                                           templates associated with elements for a type of projection (plan, section,
                                           elevation) that automatically generates dimensioning of the element,
                                           assigns line weights, and generates annotations from defined attributes.
                                           This greatly speeds-up the initial drawing setup and improves produc-
                                           tivity, though set-up for each object family is tedious. Only changes to
                                           the presentation of data can be made in drawings; edits to the drawing
                                           do not change the model. In these first two cases, report management
                                           should be provided to inform the user that model changes have been
                                           made, but the drawings cannot automatically update to reflect these
                                           changes until they are regenerated.
                                        3. Current top-level drawing functionality supports bi-directional editing
                                           between models and drawings. If drawings are a specialized view of
                                           the model data, then shape-changes made to the drawings should be




c02.indd 50                                                                                                          12/19/07 1:53:37 PM
                                                                       2.2 Varied Capabilities of Parametric Modelers    51

                     permitted in and propagated to the model. In this case, the drawings
                     are updated. If displayed in windows alongside views of the 3D model,
                     updates in any view can be referenced immediately in the other views.
                     Bi-directional views and strong template generation capabilities further
                     reduce the time and effort needed for drawing generation.

                   Door, window and hardware schedules are defined in a similar way to the
              three alternatives described above. That is, schedules are also model views and
              can be updated directly. A static report generator method is weakest, and a
              strong bi-directional approach is strongest. Such bi-directionality offers impor-
              tant benefits, including the ability to trade hardware used on a set of doors
              with hardware recommended on the schedule, rather from the model.
                   In fabrication-level BIM modeling systems, this mixed system of schematic
              3D layout and 2D detailing is not used, and the design is assumed to be gener-
              ated primarily from the 3D object model. In these cases, joists, studs, plates,
              plywood sills, and other pieces shown in Figure 2-12 would be laid out in 3D.
              Line-weights and crosshatching are defined for the piece type and applied
              automatically. Some systems store and place associated annotations with object
              sections, though these annotations often need shifting to achieve a well-
              composed layout. Other annotations refer to details as a whole, such as name,
              scale, and other general notes and these must be associated with the overall
              detail. Such capabilities come close to automated drawing extraction, but it is
              unlikely that automation will be complete.
                   Drawing sheets typically carry more information than plans, sections, and
              elevations for a building. They include a site plan, which shows the building’s
              placement on the ground plot relative to recorded geo-spatial datum. Some
              BIM design tools have well developed site-planning capabilities, others do not.
              Table 2-1 shows which BIM design tools include site objects.
                   An obvious current goal is to automate the drawing production process as
              much as possible, since most initial design productivity benefits (and costs)
              will depend on the extent of automatic generation. At some point, most parties
              involved in the building delivery process will adapt their practices to BIM tech-
              nology, such as building inspectors, and financial institutions; we are slowly
              moving to a paperless world. Drawings will continue to be used, but as throw-
              away mark-up sheets by construction crews and other users. As these changes
              take place, the conventions regarding architectural drawings are likely to
              evolve, allowing them to be customized for the specific task in which they are
              used. This trend is described in further detail in Section 2.3.3.
                   It should be clear at this point that BIM technology generally allows design-
              ers to use 3D modeling to varying degrees, with 2D drawing sections filling in




c02.indd 51                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:53:38 PM
          52 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 the missing details. The BIM benefits of data exchange, bills of material, detailed
                                 cost estimation, and other actions are lost on those elements defined only in 2D
                                 section drawings. Thus, BIM technology allows users to determine the level of
                                 3D modeling detail they wish to use. It can be argued that complete 3D object
                                 modeling is not warranted. Few would argue to include nails, flashing, and
                                 some forms of vapor barrier as 3D objects in a building model. On the other
                                 hand, most projects today are only partially supporting BIM. Fabrication-level
                                 models are likely (or should be) full BIM. This mixed technology is also good for
                                 firms getting started in BIM, as they can utilize the technology incrementally.

                                 2.2.4 Scalability
                                 A problem that many users encounter is scalability. Problems in scaling are
                                 encountered when a project model gets too large for practical use due to its
                                 large memory size. Operations become too sluggish, so that even simple opera-
                                 tions are unfeasible. Building models are large; even simple 3D shapes take a
                                 lot of memory space. Large buildings can contain millions of objects, each with
                                 a different shape. Scalability is affected by both the size of the building, say in
                                 floor area, and also by the level of detail in the model. Even a simple building
                                 can encounter scalability problems if every nail and screw is modeled.
                                      Parametric modeling incorporates design rules that relate geometry or
                                 other parameters of one object with those of other objects. Changing one con-
                                 trol grid may propagate updates to the whole building. Thus, it is hard to parti-
                                 tion a project into parts for separate development. BIM tools developed for
                                 architecture do not generally have the means for managing a project spanning
                                 multiple object files. Some systems must carry all updated objects in memory
                                 simultaneously and are considered memory-based. When the model gets too
                                 large to be held in memory, virtual memory-swapping occurs, which can result
                                 in significant waiting time. Some systems have methods of propagating rela-
                                 tions and updates across files and can open, update, and then close multiple
                                 files within the span of a single operation. These are called file-based systems.
                                 File-based systems are generally slower for small projects but their speed
                                 decreases only slowly as project size grows.
                                      Based on these definitions, Revit and ArchiCAD are memory-based;
                                 Bentley, Digital Project and Tekla Structures are file-based. Tool-specific work
                                 processes can mitigate some of the problems associated with scalability. These
                                 should be discussed with product vendors.
                                      Memory and processing issues will naturally decrease as computers get
                                 faster. Sixty-four-bit processors and operating systems will also provide signifi-
                                 cant help. There will be the parallel desire, however, for more detailed building
                                 models. Issues of scalability will be with us for some time.




c02.indd 52                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:53:39 PM
                                                                        2.2 Varied Capabilities of Parametric Modelers    53

              2.2.5 Open Questions
              Strengths and Limitations of Object-Based Parametric Modeling
              One major benefit of parametric modeling is the intelligent design behavior of
              objects. This intelligence, however, comes at a cost. Each type of system object
              has its own behavior and associations. As a result, BIM design tools are inher-
              ently complex. Each type of building system is composed of objects that are
              created and edited differently. Effective use of a BIM design tool usually takes
              months to gain proficiency.
                  Modeling software that some designers prefer, such as Sketchup, Rhino,
              and FormZ, are not parametric modeling–based tools. Rather, they have a fixed
              way of geometrically editing objects, varied only according to the surface types
              used; and this same functionality is applied to all object types. Thus, an editing
              operation applied to walls will have the same behavior when it is applied to
              piping. In these systems, attributes defining the object type and its functional
              intention, if applied at all, can be added when the user chooses, not when it is
              created. An argument can be made that for design use, BIM technology with its
              object-specific behavior is not always warranted. This topic is explored further
              in Chapter 5.


              Why Can’t Different Parametric Modelers Exchange Their Models?
              It is often asked why firms cannot directly exchange a model from Revit with
              Bentley Architecture, or exchange ArchiCAD with Digital Project. From the
              overview discussed previously, it should be apparent that the reason for this
              lack of interoperability is due to the fact that different BIM design tools rely on
              different definitions of their base objects. These are the result of different capa-
              bilities involving rule types in the BIM tool and also the rules applied in the
              definition of object families. This problem applies only to parametric objects,
              not those with fixed properties. These problems could disappear if and when
              organizations agree on a standard for object definitions. Until then, exchanges
              for some objects will be limited or will fail completely. Improvements will come
              about incrementally, as the demand to resolve these issues makes implementa-
              tion worthwhile, and the multiple associated issues are sorted out. The same
              issue exists in manufacturing and has not yet been resolved.


              Are There Inherent Differences in Construction, Fabrication, and
              Architectural BIM Design Tools?
              Could the same BIM platform support both design and fabrication detailing?
              Because the base technology for all of these systems has much in common,
              there is no technological reason why building design and fabrication BIM tools




c02.indd 53                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:53:39 PM
          54 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 cannot offer products in each other’s area. This is happening to some degree
                                 with Revit Structures and Bentley Structures. They are developing some of the
                                 capabilities offered by fabrication-level BIM tools. Both sides address the engi-
                                 neering market and, to a lesser degree, the contractor market; but the expertise
                                 needed to support full production use in these information-rich areas will
                                 depend on major front-end embedding of requisite object behaviors, which are
                                 distinctly different for each building system. Expert knowledge of specific build-
                                 ing system object behaviors is more readily embedded when it is codified, as it
                                 is, for example, in structural system design. The interfaces, reports, and other
                                 system issues may vary, but we are likely to see skirmishes in the middle-ground
                                 for a significant period of time, as each product attempts to broaden its market
                                 domains.

                                 Are There Significant Differences between Manufacturing- Oriented
                                 Parametric Modeling Tools and BIM Tools?
                                 Could a parametric modeling system for mechanical design be adapted for
                                 BIM? Some differences in system architecture are noted in Section 2.3.1. Of
                                 course, mechanical parametric modeling tools have already been adapted for
                                 the AEC market. Digital Project, based on CATIA, is an obvious example.
                                 Also, Structureworks is a precast concrete detailing and fabrication product
                                 based on Solidworks. In other areas, such as plumbing, curtain wall fabrica-
                                 tion, and ductwork design, we can expect to see both mechanical parametric
                                 modeling tools and architectural and fabrication-level BIM tools vying for
                                 these markets. The range of functionality offered in each market is still being
                                 sorted out. The market is the battleground.
                                      This chapter has provided an overview of the basic capabilities of BIM
                                 design tools resulting from their development as object-based parametric design
                                 tools. We now turn to reviewing the main BIM design tools and their functional
                                 differences.



                                      2.3 OVERVIEW OF THE MAJOR BIM MODEL
                                          GENERATING SYSTEMS

                                 Below, we summarize the major functional and performance capabilities that
                                 distinguish different BIM design systems, as presented in earlier sections of
                                 this chapter. The capabilities apply to both design-oriented systems as well as
                                 fabrication BIM tools. These distinguishing capabilities are proposed for those
                                 wishing to undertake a first-level review and assessment of alternative systems,
                                 so as to make a well-informed decision for a platform at the project, office, or




c02.indd 54                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:53:40 PM
                                                           2.3 Overview of the Major BIM Model Generating Systems    55

              enterprise. The choice affects production practices, interoperability, and to
              some degree, the functional capabilities of a design organization to do particu-
              lar types of projects. Current products also have different capabilities regard-
              ing interoperability, which may affect their ability to collaborate and can lead
              to convoluted workflows and replicated data.
                   We emphasize that no one platform will be ideal for all types of projects.
              Ideally, an organization would have several platforms that it supports and tog-
              gles between for specific projects. At this early date, an effort to adopt any of
              the available BIM design tools is a significant undertaking and is discussed in
              later chapters. It involves understanding the new technology, the new organi-
              zational skills it presupposes, and then learning and managing those skills.
              These challenges will recede over time, as the learning curve for one system is
              scaled. Because the functionality of BIM design tools are changing quickly, it
              is important to look at reviews of the current versions in AECBytes, Cadalyst,
              or other AEC CAD journals.

              2.3.1 Discriminating Capabilities
              Within the common framework of providing object-based parametric modeling,
              BIM authoring tools embody many different kinds of capabilities. Below, we
              describe them in rough-rank based on our sense of their level of importance.

                  User Interface: BIM tools are quite complex and have much greater func-
                  tionality than earlier CAD tools. Some BIM design tools have a relatively
                  intuitive and easy-to-learn user interface, with a modular structure to their
                  functionality, while others place more emphasis on functionality that is not
                  always well-integrated into the overall system. Criteria to be considered
                  here should include: consistency of menus across the system’s function-
                  alities following standard conventions; menu-hiding that eliminates irrel-
                  evant actions not meaningful to the current context of activities; modular
                  organization of different kinds of functionality and on-line help provid-
                  ing real-time prompts and command-line explanation of operations and
                  inputs. While user interface issues may seem minor, a poor user interface
                  results in longer learning times, more errors, and often not taking full ad-
                  vantage of the functionality built into the application.
                  Drawing Generation: How easy is it to generate drawings and draw-
                  ing sets and to maintain them through multiple updates and series of
                  releases? Assessment should include quick visualization of the effects
                  of model changes on drawings, strong associations so that model changes
                  propagate directly to drawings and vice versa, and effective template
                  generation that allows drawing types to carry out as much automatic




c02.indd 55                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:53:40 PM
          56 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                    formatting as possible. A more thorough review of functionality is
                                    provided in Section 2.2.3.
                                    Ease of Developing Custom Parametric Objects: This is evaluated with
                                    regard to the existence and ease-of-use of a sketching tool for defining
                                    parametric objects; determining the extent of the system’s constraint
                                    or rule-set (‘a general constraint rule set should include distance, angle
                                    including orthogonality, abutting faces and line tangency rules and ‘if-then’
                                    conditions) its ability to interface the objects into the user interface for
                                    easy embedding in a project’) and its ability to support parametric assem-
                                    blies of objects. These issues are explained further in Section 2.1.4.
                                    Scalability: the ability to handle combinations of a large project scale and
                                    modeling at a high level of detail. This involves the ability of the system
                                    to remain interactive and responsive regardless of the number of 3D para-
                                    metric objects in the project. A fundamental issue is the degree that the
                                    system is disk-based, in terms of data management, rather then memory-
                                    based. Disk-based systems are slower for small projects, but their delay
                                    time grows slowly as the project size grows. Memory based systems per-
                                    formance drops quickly once memory space is exhausted. These issues
                                    are partially limited by the operating system; Windows XP supports up to
                                    2 GB of working memory for a single process. Sixty-four-bit architectures
                                    eliminate the memory use restriction. Graphic card performance is impor-
                                    tant for some systems. This topic is discussed in Sec. 2.2.4.
                                    Interoperability: Model data is generated, in part, to share with other
                                    applications for early project feasibility studies, for collaboration with
                                    engineers and other consultants and later for construction. It is supported
                                    by the degree that the BIM tool provides direct interfaces with other specific
                                    products and, more generally, its import and export support of open data
                                    exchange standards, which are reviewed in detail in Chapter 3.
                                    Extensibility: A BIM authoring tool is both for end-use and for use as a plat-
                                    form for customization and extension. Extensibility capabilities are assessed
                                    based on whether they provide scripting support—an interactive language
                                    that adds functionality or automates low-level tasks, similar to AutoLISP® in
                                    AutoCAD—an Excel format bi-directional interface, and a broad and well-
                                    documented application programming interface (API). Scripting languages
                                    and Excel interfaces are generally for end-users, while an API is for software
                                    developers. These capabilities are needed depending on the extent to which
                                    a firm expects to customize, particularly in the area of interoperability.
                                    Complex Curved Surface Modeling: Support for creating and editing com-
                                    plex surface models based on quadrics, splines, and non-uniform B-splines




c02.indd 56                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:53:40 PM
                                                            2.3 Overview of the Major BIM Model Generating Systems    57

                  is important for those firms that do this type of work or that are planning
                  to. These geometric modeling capabilities in a BIM tool are foundational;
                  they cannot be added on later.
                  Multi-User Environment: Some systems support collaboration among a
                  design team. They allow multiple users to create and edit parts of the same
                  project directly from a single project file and manage user access to these
                  various information parts.

                  Below, we offer an overview of the current capabilities of the major build-
              ing model generation platforms. Some reviewed support only architectural
              design functions, others only various types of fabrication-level building systems,
              and others both. Each assessment is for the version of the software system
              noted; later versions may have better or worse capabilities. We review them
              according to the criteria developed above.

              2.3.2 BIM Tools for Architectural Design
              Each BIM building design platform is introduced in terms of its heritage, cor-
              porate organization, the family of products it is a part of, whether it uses a
              single file or multiple files per project, support for concurrent usage, interfaces
              supported, extent of the object library, general price class, building classifica-
              tion system supported, scalability, ease of drawing generation, support for 2D
              drawn sections, types of objects and derived attributes, and ease of use.
                   As is broadly understood, the acquisition of a software package is very dif-
              ferent from most other purchases we make. Whereas the purchase of a car is
              based on a very specific product and set of features, a software package involves
              both its current capabilities and the development path of enhancements that
              are released regularly, at least annually. A purchaser is buying into both the
              current product and its future evolutions, as projected by the company. One is
              also purchasing a support system that at least one person in a firm will be deal-
              ing with. The support system is an augmentation of the user-provided docu-
              mentation and on-line support built into the BIM tool.
                   Apart from the vendor’s support network, a software system owner is also
              part of a broader user community. Most provide blog communication for peer-
              to-peer help and open portals for the exchange of object families. These may be
              free or available at a small cost.
                   Revit: Revit Architecture is the best known and current market leader for
              the use of BIM in architectural design. It was introduced by Autodesk in 2002
              after the company acquired the program from a start-up. Revit is a completely
              separate platform from AutoCAD, with a different code base and file structure.
              The version reviewed here is 9.1. Revit is a family of integrated products that




c02.indd 57                                                                                                          12/19/07 1:53:41 PM
          58 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 currently includes Revit Architecture, Revit Structure, and Revit MEP. It
                                 includes: gbXML interfaces for energy simulation and load analysis; direct
                                 interfaces to ROBOT and RISA structural analyses, and the ability to import
                                 models from Sketchup, a conceptual design tool, and other systems that export
                                 DXF files. Viewing interfaces include: DGN, DWG, DWF™, DXF™, IFC, SAT,
                                 SKP, AVI, ODBC, gbXML, BMP, JPG, TGA, and TIF. Revit relies on 2D sec-
                                 tions as a way of detailing most types of assemblies.
                                      Revit’s strengths: It’s easy to learn and its functionality is organized in a
                                 well-designed and user-friendly interface. It has a broad set of object libraries
                                 developed by third parties. It is the preferred interface for direct link interfaces,
                                 because of its market position. Its bi-directional drawing support allows for
                                 information generation and management based on updates from drawing and
                                 model views; it supports concurrent operation on the same project; and it
                                 includes an excellent object library that supports a multi-user interface.
                                      Revit’s weaknesses: Revit is an in-memory system that slows down
                                 significantly for projects larger than about 220 megabytes. It has limitations on
                                 parametric rules dealing with angles. It also does not support complex curved
                                 surfaces, which limits its ability to support design with or reference to these
                                 types of surfaces.
                                      Bentley Systems: Bentley Systems offers a wide range of related products for
                                 architecture, engineering, and construction. Their architectural BIM tool, Bentley
                                 Architecture, introduced in 2004, is an evolutionary descendent of Triforma.
                                 Integrated with Bentley Architecture are: Bentley Structural, Bentley Building
                                 Mechanical Systems, Bentley Building Electrical Systems, Bentley Facilities, Bent-
                                 ley PowerCivil (for site planning), and Bentley Generative Components. These
                                 are file-based systems, meaning that all actions are immediately written to a file
                                 and result in lower loads on memory. Third parties have developed many differ-
                                 ent applications on the file system, some incompatible with others within the
                                 same platform. Thus a user may have to convert model formats from one Bentley
                                 application to another. Currently, Bentley Architecture is in version V8.9.2.42.
                                 Interfaces with external applications include: Primavera and other scheduling
                                 systems and STAAD and RAM for structural analyses. Its interfaces include:
                                 DGN, DWG, DXF ™, PDF, STEP, IGES, STL, and IFC. Bentley also provides a
                                 multi-project and multi-user model repository called Bentley ProjectWise.
                                      Bentley System’s strengths: Bentley offers a very broad range of building
                                 modeling tools, dealing with almost all aspects of the AEC industry. Bentley
                                 supports modeling with complex curved surfaces, including Bezier and NURBS.
                                 It includes multiple levels of support for developing custom parametric objects,
                                 including the Parametric Cell Studio and Generative Components. Its
                                 parametric modeling plug-in, Generative Components, enables definition of




c02.indd 58                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:53:41 PM
                                                           2.3 Overview of the Major BIM Model Generating Systems    59

              complex parametric geometry assemblies and has been used in many prize-
              winning building projects. Bentley provides scalable support for large projects
              with many objects.
                   Bentley System’s weaknesses: It has a large and non-integrated user
              interface that is hard to learn and navigate; its heterogeneous functional mod-
              ules include different object behaviors, making it hard to learn. It has less
              extensive object libraries than similar products. The weaknesses in the integra-
              tion of its various applications reduce the value and breadth of support that
              these systems provide individually.
                   ArchiCAD: ArchiCAD is the oldest continuously marketed BIM architec-
              tural design tool availably today. Graphisoft began marketing ArchiCAD in the
              early 80s. It is the only object-model-oriented architectural CAD system run-
              ning on the Apple Macintosh. Headquartered in Budapest, Graphisoft was
              recently acquired by Nemetschek, a German CAD company popular in Europe
              with strong civil engineering applications. The current version of ArchiCAD is
              release 11.0. Today, ArchiCAD continues to serve the Mac platform in addi-
              tion to Windows and has recently released a Mac OS X (UNIX) version. Gra-
              phisoft recently introduced a number of construction-oriented applications on
              the ArchiCAD platform. In early 2007, after Graphisoft was acquired by
              Nemetschek, the construction applications were spun off to Vico Software, a
              new company that is actively marketing them. These applications are discussed
              in Chapter 6.
                   ArchiCAD supports a range of direct interfaces, with Maxon for curved
              surface modeling and animation, ArchiFM for facility management and Sketchup.
              It has interfaces with a suite of interfaces for energy and sustainability (gbXML,
              Ecotect, Energy⫹, ARCHiPHISIK and RIUSKA). Custom parametric objects
              are primarily defined using the GDL (Geometric Description language) script-
              ing language, which relies on CSG-type constructions and a Basic-like syntax.
              (Basic is a simple programming language often taught to beginners). It contains
              extensive object libraries for users and also has an OBDC interface.
                   ArchiCAD’s strengths: It has an intuitive interface and is relatively simple
              to use. It has large object libraries, and a rich suite of supporting applications
              in construction and facility management. It is the only strong BIM product cur-
              rently available for Macs.
                   ArchiCAD’s weaknesses: It has some limitations in its parametric mode-
              ling capabilities, not supporting update rules between objects in an assembly
              or automatic application of Boolean operations between objects (Khemlani
              2006). While ArchiCAD is an in-memory system and can encounter scaling
              problems with large projects, it has effective ways to manage large projects; it
              can partition large projects well into modules in order to manage them.




c02.indd 59                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:53:42 PM
          60 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                      Digital Project: Developed by Gehry Technologies, Digital Project (DP)
                                 is an architectural and building customization of Dassault’s CATIA, the
                                 world’s most widely used parametric modeling platform for large systems in
                                 aerospace and automotive industries. DP requires a powerful workstation to
                                 run well, but it is able handle even the largest projects. The One Island East
                                 case study in Chapter 9 provides an example of DP’s ability to model every
                                 part of a 70 story office tower. It is able to model any type of surface and can
                                 support elaborate custom parametric objects, which is what it was designed
                                 to do. The logical structure of CATIA involves modules called Workbenches.
                                 Until the third release of Version 5, it did not include built-in base objects for
                                 buildings. Users could re-use objects developed by others, but these were not
                                 supported by DP itself. With the introduction of the Architecture and Struc-
                                 tures Workbench, Gehry Technologies has added significant value to the base
                                 product. Although not advertised, DP comes with several other workbenches:
                                 Knowledge Expert supports rule-based checking of design; the Project Engi-
                                 neering Optimizer allows for easy optimization of parametric designs based
                                 on any well-defined objective function; and Project Manager for tracking
                                 parts of a model and managing their release. It has interfaces with Ecotect for
                                 energy studies.
                                      DP supports VBA scripting and a strong API for developing add-ons. It
                                 has the Uniformat© and Masterformat© classifications embedded, which facili-
                                 tates integration of specifications for cost estimating. It supports the following
                                 exchange formats: CIS/2, SDNF, STEP AP203 and AP214, DWG, DXF ™,
                                 VRML, STL, HOOPS, SAT, 3DXML, IGES, and HCG. In Release 3, it has IFC
                                 support.
                                      Digital Project’s strengths: It offers very powerful and complete para-
                                 metric modeling capabilities and is able to directly model large complex assem-
                                 blies for controlling both surfaces and assemblies. Digital Project relies on 3D
                                 parametric modeling for most kinds of detailing.
                                      Digital Project’s weaknesses: It requires a steep learning curve, has a
                                 complex user interface, and high initial cost. Its predefined object libraries for
                                 buildings are still limited. External third party object libraries are limited.
                                 Drawing capabilities for architectural use are not well developed; most users
                                 output sections to drafting systems for completion.
                                      AutoCAD-based Applications: Autodesk’s premier building application on
                                 the AutoCAD platform is Architectural Desktop (ADT). ADT was Autodesk’s
                                 original 3D building modeling tool prior to the acquisition of Revit. It is based
                                 on solid and surface modeling extensions for AutoCAD and provides a transition
                                 from 2D drafting to BIM. It has a predefined set of architectural objects, and
                                 while not fully parametric, it provides much of the functionality offered by




c02.indd 60                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:53:42 PM
                                                             2.3 Overview of the Major BIM Model Generating Systems    61

              parametric tools, including the ability to make custom objects with adaptive
              behaviors. External Reference Files (XREF) are useful for managing large
              projects. Drawing files remain separate from the 3D model and must be managed
              by the user, albeit with a degree of system version control. It relies on AutoCAD’s
              well-known capabilities for drawing production. Interfaces include: DGN, DWG,
              DWF™, DXF™, and IFC. Its programming extensions include: AutoLISP, Visual
              Basic, VB Script, and ARX (C++) interfaces.
                   Additional 3D applications developed on AutoCAD come from a large
              world-wide developer community. These include Computer Services Consult-
              ants (CSC) which offers a number of structural design and analysis packages,
              AEC Design Group, which offers CADPIPE, COADE Engineering Software,
              that offers piping and plant design software, SCADA Software AG, that
              develops control system software, and other groups that produce 3D applica-
              tions for piping, electrical system design, structural steel, fire sprinkler systems,
              ductwork, wood framing and others.
                   AutoCAD -based applications’ strengths: Ease of adoption for AutoCAD
              users because of user interface consistency; easy use because they build upon
              AutoCAD’s well-known 2D drafting functionality and interface.
                   AutoCAD -based applications’ weaknesses: Their fundamental limita-
              tions are that they are not parametric modelers that allow non-programmers
              to define object rules and constraints; limited interfaces to other applications;
              use of XREFs (with inherent integration limitations) for managing projects; an
              in-memory system with scaling problems if XREFs are not relied upon; need
              to propagate changes manually across drawings sets.
                   Tekla Structures: Tekla Structures is offered by Tekla Corp., a Finnish
              company founded in 1966 with offices worldwide. Tekla has multiple divisions:
              Building and Construction, Infrastructure and Energy. Its initial construction
              product was Xsteel, which was introduced in the mid-1990s and grew to be
              the most widely used steel detailing application throughout the world.
                   In response to demand from precast concrete fabricators in Europe and
              North America (represented by the ad hoc Precast Concrete Software Consor-
              tium), the software’s functionality was significantly extended to support fabri-
              cation-level detailing of precast concrete structures and facades. At the same
              time, support for structural analysis, direct links to finite-element analysis
              packages (STAAD-Pro and ETABS), and an open application programming
              interface were added. In 2004 the expanded software product was renamed
              Tekla Structures to reflect its generic support for steel, precast concrete, tim-
              ber, reinforced concrete, and for structural engineering.
                   Tekla Structures supports interfaces with: IFC, DWG ™, CIS/2, DTSV,
              SDNF, DGN, and DXF ™ file formats. It also has export capabilities to CNC




c02.indd 61                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:53:43 PM
          62 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling

                                 fabrication equipment and to fabrication plant automation software, such as
                                 Fabtrol (steel) and Eliplan (precast).
                                      Tekla Structures’ strengths: Its versatile ability to model structures that
                                 incorporate all kinds of structural materials and detailing; its ability to support
                                 very large models and concurrent operations on the same project and with
                                 multiple simultaneous users. It supports compilation of complex parametric
                                 custom component libraries with little or no programming.
                                      Tekla structures’ weaknesses: While a powerful tool, its full functionality
                                 is quite complex to learn and fully utilize. The power of its parametric compo-
                                 nent facility, while a strength, requires sophisticated operators who must
                                 develop high levels of skill. It is not able to import complex multi-curved
                                 surfaces from outside applications, sometimes leading to work-arounds. It is
                                 relatively expensive.
                                      DProfiler: DProfiler is a product of Beck Technologies, located in Dallas,
                                 Texas. It is based on a parametric modeling platform acquired from Parametric
                                 Technologies Corporation (PTC) in the middle 1990s, after PTC decided not to
                                 enter the AEC market. DProfiler is an application based on a platform called
                                 DESTINI that has evolved from the PTC-acquired software. DProfiler supports
                                 very quick definition for the conceptual design of certain building types and
                                 then provides feedback regarding construction costs and time. For income
                                 generating facilities, such as hotels, apartments, and office buildings, it provides
                                 a full economic cash-flow development proforma. It supports planning for:
                                 office buildings up to 20 stories; one and two-story medical buildings; apart-
                                 ment buildings and hotels up to 24 stories; elementary, middle, and high schools;
                                 and town halls, churches, and movie centers and more. With financial and
                                 schedule reporting, the user gains a set of concept design drawings. Users can
                                 input their own cost data or use data from RSMeans. Their advertising states
                                 5% accuracy in its business calculations, but these are informal assessments. It
                                 currently supports Sketchup and DWG export for further development. The
                                 Hillwood case study (Section 9.9) describes its use. Its interfaces include Excel
                                 and DWG. Other applications being developed on the DESTINI platform
                                 include energy analyses.
                                      DProfiler strengths: DProfiler is being marketed as a closed system, pri-
                                 marily for preliminary feasibility studies before actual design begins. Its ability
                                 to generate quick economic assessments on a project plan is unique.
                                      DProfiler weaknesses: DProfiler is not a general purpose BIM tool. Its
                                 single purpose (currently) is economic evaluation of a construction project
                                 (cost estimating and, where appropriate, income forecasting). Once a model is
                                 complete, its interface to support full development in other BIM design tools
                                 is limited to 2D DWG files.




c02.indd 62                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:53:43 PM
                                                                                                    2.4 Conclusion    63

                   2.4 CONCLUSION

              Object-based parametric modeling is a major change for the building industry
              that is greatly facilitating the move from a drawing-based and handcraft tech-
              nology to one based on digitally readable models that can be exchanged with
              other applications. Parametric modeling facilitates the design of large and
              complex models in 3D but imposes a style of modeling and planning that is
              foreign to many users. Like CADD, it is most directly used as a documentation
              tool separate from designing. A growing number of firms, however, use it
              directly for design and for generating exciting results. Some of these uses are
              taken up in Chapter 5, and the case studies in Chapter 9 provide further
              examples.
                   The ability to extract geometric and property information from a building
              model for use in design, analysis, construction planning, and fabrication, or in
              operations, will have large impacts on all aspects of the AEC industries. Many
              of these opportunities are taken up and discussed in the succeeding chapters.
              The full potential of this enabling capability will not be fully known for at least
              a decade, because its implications and new uses are discovered gradually. What
              is currently known is that object-based parametric modeling resolves many of
              the fundamental representational issues in architecture and construction and
              allows quick payoffs for those transitioning to it, even with only partial imple-
              mentation. These payoffs include a reduction in drawing errors due to the
              built-in consistency of a central building model and the elimination of design
              errors based on spatial interferences.
                   While object-based parametric modeling has had a catalytic influence on
              the emergence and acceptance of BIM, it is not synonymous with BIM tools
              or the generation of building models. There are many other design, analysis,
              checking, display, and reporting tools that can play an important role in BIM
              procedures. Many information components and information types are needed
              to fully design and construct a building. The authors are of the opinion that
              many types of software can facilitate the development and maturing of Building
              Information Modeling. The BIM tools considered here are only the newest in
              several generations of tools, but in fact they are proving to be revolutionary
              in their impact.




c02.indd 63                                                                                                          12/19/07 1:53:43 PM
          64 Chapter 2 BIM Tools and Parametric Modeling


                                   Chapter 2 Discussion Questions
                                              1. Summarize the major functionalities that distinguish the
                                                 capabilities of a BIM design tool from 3D CAD modeling
                                                 tools.
                                              2. Most BIM design tools support both 3D object models as
                                                 well as 2D drawn sections. What considerations should
                                                 be made when determining the changeover level of detail,
                                                 such as when to stop modeling in 3D and complete the
                                                 drawings in 2D?
                                              3. Why is it unlikely that a single integrated system will
                                                 incorporate a unified parametric model of all of a
                                                 building’s systems? On the other hand, what would be the
                                                 advantages if it could be achieved?
                                              4. In what ways are some of the current popular design tools
                                                 not BIM tools? Sketchup? 3D Max Viz? FormZ? Rhino?
                                              5. What are the essential differences between a manufactur-
                                                 ing parametric modeling tool, such as Autodesk Inventor,
                                                 and a BIM design tool, such as Revit?
                                              6. Do you think there may be additional manufacturing
                                                 oriented parametric modeling tools used as a platform to
                                                 develop BIM applications? What are the marketing costs
                                                 and benefits? What are the technical issues?
                                              7. Suppose you are a Chief Information Officer for a
                                                 medium-sized architectural firm (with fewer than
                                                 25 employees). The firm specializes in school builings.
                                                 Propose an outline structure for the firm’s custom object
                                                 library. Relate to the list of built-in objects in Table 2-1
                                                 when considering your answer.
                                              8. You are part of a small team of friends that has decided to
                                                 start an integrated design-build firm comprised of both a
                                                 small commercial contractor and two architects. Lay out a
                                                 plan for selecting one or more BIM-model creation tools.
                                                 Define the general criteria for the overall system environment.




c02.indd 64                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:53:44 PM
              CHAPTER                       3
              Interoperability



                     3.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

              No single computer application can support all of the tasks associated with
              building design and production. Interoperability depicts the need to pass data
              between applications, allowing multiple types of experts and applications to
              contribute to the work at hand. Interoperability has traditionally relied on file-
              based exchange formats, such as DXF (Drawing eXchange Format) and IGES
              that exchange only geometry.
                    Starting in the late 1980s, data models were developed to support product
              and object model exchanges within different industries, led by the ISO-STEP
              international standards effort. Data model standards are developed both
              through the ISO organization and by industry-led efforts, using the same tech-
              nology, specifically the EXPRESS data modeling language. EXPRESS is
              machine-readable and has multiple implementations, including a compact text
              file format, SQL and object database implementations and XML implementa-
              tions. All are in use.
                    The two main building product data models are the Industry Foundation
              Classes (IFC) – for building planning, design, construction and management
              and CIMsteel Integration Standard Version 2, (CIS/2) – for structural steel
              engineering and fabrication. Both IFC and CIS/2 represent geometry, relations,
              processes and material, performance, fabrication and other properties, needed
              for design and production, using the EXPRESS language. Both are frequently
              extended, based on user needs.
                    Because EXPRESS supports applications with multiple redundant types of
              attributes and geometry, two applications can export or import different
              BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.    65
              Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.




c03.indd 65                                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:55:30 PM
          66 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                 information for describing the same object. Efforts are being made to stand-
                                 ardize the data required for particular workflow exchanges. In the US, the
                                 main effort is called the National BIM Standards (NBIMS) project. Interoper-
                                 ability imposes a new level of modeling rigor that firms are still learning to
                                 manage. Other formats for model viewing – 3D PDF and DWF – provide capa-
                                 bilities that resolve some types of interoperability problems.
                                      While files support exchange between two applications, there is a growing
                                 need to coordinate data in multiple applications through a building model
                                 repository. Only in this way can the consistency, data and change management
                                 be realized for large projects. However, there are still some unresolved issues
                                 in the general use of building model repositories.



                                      3.1 INTRODUCTION

                                 The design and construction of a building is a team activity and increasingly, each
                                 activity and each type of specialty is supported and augmented by its own com-
                                 puter applications. Beside the capability to support geometry and material lay-
                                 out, there are structural and energy analyses, cost estimation and scheduling the
                                 construction, fabrication issues for each subsystem, plus much more. Interoper-
                                 ability identifies the need to pass data between applications, and for multiple
                                 applications to jointly contribute to the work at hand. Interoperability eliminates
                                 the need to replicate data input that has already been generated, and facilitates
                                 smooth workflows and automation. In the same way that architecture and con-
                                 struction are collaborative activities, so too are the tools that support them.
                                      Even in the earliest days of 2D CAD in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the
                                 need to exchange data between different applications was apparent. The most
                                 widely used AEC CAD system at that time was Intergraph. A set of businesses
                                 arose to write software to translate Intergraph project files to other systems,
                                 especially for process plant design, for example exchanging data between the
                                 piping design software and the piping bills of material or analysis applications.
                                      Later, in the post-Sputnik era, NASA found that they were expending sig-
                                 nificant amounts of money paying for translators among all their CAD develop-
                                 ers. The NASA representative, Robert Fulton, brought all the CAD software
                                 companies together and demanded that they agree on a public domain exchange
                                 format. Two NASA-funded companies, Boeing and General Electric, offered to
                                 adapt some initial efforts they had undertaken separately. The resulting exchange
                                 standard was christened IGES (Initial Graphics Exchange Specification). Using
                                 IGES, each software company need only develop two translators (it was
                                 thought), for exporting from and importing to their application, instead of




c03.indd 66                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:55:31 PM
                                                                            3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats    67

              developing a translator for every pair-wise exchange. IGES was an early success
              that is still widely used throughout all design and engineering communities.
                   One of the impetuses for the development of BIM design tools was the already
              existing development of object-based parametric design being used in many con-
              struction support activities. Anyone visiting the kitchen department of a Home
              Depot or Lowes has been able to select, configure and review a kitchen design
              while making a purchase. What you might not have seen, however, is how these
              tools plan the cutting of the hardwood, plywood or other construction materials,
              how the software automatically defines the joinery and even the production
              plan. Similar tools have existed in structural steel for 3D design, analysis and
              fabrication since the mid-1990s. Sheet metal and ductwork fabrication has been
              available since that time also (these technologies are reviewed in Chapter 7).
                   In effect, most of the downstream fabrication of building systems has been
              moving to parametric modeling and computer-aided fabrication. The gap was
              at the front-end involving the building design itself (Eastman et al. 2002). In
              addition, of course, are the various analysis applications for structures, energy
              use, lighting, acoustics, air flow, etc. that have the potential to inform design
              (as well as review it at the end, which is where these tools are mostly used
              today). Because the BIM design tools have been developed in an industry where
              these diverse applications already exist, the need to interface or more inti-
              mately interoperate with these tools is a basic requirement.


                   3.2 DIFFERENT KINDS OF EXCHANGE FORMATS

              Data exchanges between two applications are typically carried out in one of the
              four main ways listed below:

                  1. Direct, proprietary links between specific BIM tools
                  2. Proprietary file exchange formats, primarily dealing with geometry
                  3. Public product data model exchange formats
                  4. XML-based exchange formats

                  Direct links provide an integrated connection between two applications,
              usually called from one or both application user interfaces. Direct links rely on
              middleware software interfacing capabilities such as ODBC or COM or propri-
              etary interfaces, such as ArchiCad’s GDL or Bentley’s MDL. These are all
              programming level interfaces, relying on C, C or now Cⱅ languages. The
              interfaces make portions of the application’s building model accessible for
              creation, export, modification or deletion.




c03.indd 67                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:55:32 PM
          68 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                      A proprietary exchange file format is one developed by a commercial
                                 organization for interfacing with that company’s application. While a direct
                                 linking of applications is a runtime and binary interface, an exchange format is
                                 implemented as a file in a human readable text format. A well known propri-
                                 etary exchange format in the AEC area is DXF (Data eXchange Format) defined
                                 by Autodesk. Other proprietary exchange formats include SAT (defined by
                                 Spatial Technology, the implementer of the ACIS geometric modeling software
                                 kernel), STL for stereo-lithography and 3DS for 3D-Studio. Because each of
                                 these has their own purpose, they address functionally specific capabilities.
                                      The public level exchange formats involve using an open-standard build-
                                 ing model, of which the IFC (Industry Foundation Class) (IAI 2007), or CIS/2
                                 (CIS/2 2007) for steel, are the principle options. Notice that the product model
                                 formats carry object and material properties and also relations between objects,
                                 in addition to geometry. These are essential for interfacing to analysis and con-
                                 struction management applications.
                                      Software companies quite reasonably prefer to provide exchanges to spe-
                                 cific companies using a direct link, because they can support them better, and
                                 it keeps customers from using competitor’s applications. The functionality sup-
                                 ported is determined by the two companies (or divisions within the same com-
                                 pany). However, because they have been developed, debugged and maintained
                                 by the two companies involved, they are typically robust for the versions of the
                                 software designed for, and the functionality intended. The resulting inter-
                                 face usually reflects a joint business agreement regarding marketing and sales.
                                 The interfaces are maintained as long as their business relationship holds.
                                      On the other hand, there is a natural desire to ‘mix-and-match’ applica-
                                 tions to provide functionality beyond what can be offered by any single software
                                 company. The method of integration becomes critical for projects involving
                                 large teams, because gaining interoperability of different systems used by the
                                 team is easier than moving all team firms to a single platform. The public
                                 sector also wishes to avoid a proprietary solution that gives any one software
                                 platform a monopoly. Only IFC and CIS/2 (for steel) are public and interna-
                                 tionally recognized standards today. Thus the IFC data model is likely to
                                 become the international standard for data exchange and integration within
                                 the building construction industries.
                                      XML is eXtensible Markup Language, an extension to HTML, the base
                                 language of the Web. XML allows definition of the structure and meaning of
                                 some data of interest; that structure is called a schema. The different XML
                                 schemas support exchange of many types of data between applications. XML is
                                 especially good in exchanging small amounts of business data between two
                                 applications set up for such exchanges.




c03.indd 68                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:55:32 PM
                                                                                   3.2 Different Kinds of Exchange Formats    69

                   A summary of the most common exchange formats in the AEC area is
              listed in Table 3-1. Table 3-1 groups file exchange formats with regard to their
              main usage. These include 2D raster image formats for pixel-based images, 2D
              vector formats for line drawings, 3D surface and solid shape formats for 3D
              forms. 3D object-based formats are especially important for BIM uses and
              have been grouped according to their field of application. These include the
              ISO-STEP based formats that include 3D shape information along with

              Table 3-1 Common exchange formats in AEC applications.
               Image (raster) formats

               JPG, GIF, TIF, BMP, PIC, PNG, RAW, TGA,   Raster formats vary in terms of compactness,
               RLE                                       number of possible colors per pixel, some
                                                         compress with some data loss.
               2D Vector formats

               DXF, DWG, AI, CGM, EMF, IGS, WMF, DGN     Vector formats vary regarding compactness,
                                                         line widths and pattern control, color, layering
                                                         and types of curves supported.
               3D Surface and Shape formats

               3DS, WRL, STL, IGS, SAT, DXF, DWG, OBJ,   3D surface and shape formats vary
               DGN, PDF(3D), XGL, DWF, U3D, IPT, PTS     according to the types of surfaces and edges
                                                         represented, whether they represent surfaces
                                                         and/or solids, any material properties of the
                                                         shape (color, image bitmap, texture map) or
                                                         viewpoint information.
               3D Object Exchange formats

               STP, EXP, CIS/2                           Product data model formats represent
                                                         geometry according to the 2D or 3D types
                                                         represented. They also carry object properties
                                                         and relations between objects.

               Game formats

               RWQ, X, GOF, FACT                         Game file formats vary according to the types
                                                         of surfaces, whether they carry hierarchical
                                                         structure, types of material properties, texture
                                                         and bump map parameters, animation and
                                                         skinning.

               GIS formats

               SHP, SHX, DBF, DEM, NED                   Geographical information system formats

               XML formats

               AecXML, Obix, AEX, bcXML, AGCxml          XML schemas developed for the exchange
                                                         of building data. They vary according to the
                                                         information exchanged and the workflows
                                                         supported.




c03.indd 69                                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:55:33 PM
          70 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                 connectivity relations and attributes, of which the IFC building data model is
                                 of highest importance. Also listed are various game formats, which support
                                 fixed geometry, lighting, textures along with actors, and dynamic, moving
                                 geometry, and geographical information system (GIS) public exchange formats
                                 for 3D terrain, land uses and infrastructure.
                                     All methods of interoperability must deal with the issue of versions. When
                                 an application is updated with new capabilities, it may make the exchange
                                 mechanism faulty, if it is not maintained and versions of the standard are not
                                 well-managed.



                                      3.3 BACKGROUND OF PRODUCT DATA MODELS

                                 Until the mid-1980s, almost all data exchange in all design and engineering
                                 fields was based on various file formats. DXF and IGES are well-known exam-
                                 ples. These provided effective exchange formats for shapes and other geometry,
                                 which is what they were designed to do. However, object models of piping,
                                 mechanical, electrical and other systems were being developed at this time. If
                                 data exchange was to deal with models of complex objects with their geometry,
                                 attributes and relations, any fixed file exchange format quickly became so
                                 large and complex as to be useless. These issues arose in both Europe and the
                                 US about the same time. After some back and forth, the International Standards
                                 Organization (ISO) in Geneva, Switzerland, initiated a Technical Committee,
                                 TC184, to initiate a subcommittee, SC4, to develop a standard called STEP
                                 (STandard for the Exchange of Product Model Data), ISO-10303, to address
                                 these issues.
                                      The ISO-STEP organization developed a new set of technologies, based on:

                                     • Use of a machine readable modeling language instead of a file format
                                     • The language emphasizes data declarations but includes procedural
                                       capabilities for rules and constraints
                                     • The language has mappings to different implementations, including a text
                                       file format, database schema definitions, and recently, XML schemas
                                     • Reference sub-models that are shared and re-used subsets of larger
                                       standard models for geometry, measurements, representation classifica-
                                       tion and other generic needs

                                     One of the main products of ISO-STEP was the EXPRESS language,
                                 developed by Douglas Schenck and later contributed to by Peter Wilson
                                 (Schenck and Wilson 1994). EXPRESS adopts many object-oriented concepts,




c03.indd 70                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:55:33 PM
                                                                             3.3 Background of Product Data Models    71

              including multiple inheritance. Here, object refers to a computer language
              concept that is broader than just representing physical objects. Thus objects
              can be used to represent conceptual or abstracted objects, materials, geometry,
              assemblies, processes and relations, among other things.
                   EXPRESS has become the central tool to support the modeling of prod-
              ucts across a broad range of industries: mechanical and electrical systems,
              process plants, shipbuilding, processes, furniture, finite element models, plus
              others, as well as the AEC. It also includes a large number of libraries of fea-
              tures, geometry, classifications, measurements and others to use as common
              foundations for product data models. Both metric and imperial measurements
              are supported. As a machine-readable language, it is excellent for computa-
              tional use, but difficult for human users; thus a graphical display version of the
              language was developed and is commonly used, called EXPRESS-G. The prod-
              uct data model for an application domain is called an Application Protocol, or
              AP. All the ISO-STEP information is in the public domain.
                   Because EXPRESS is machine readable, it can have multiple implementa-
              tions. These include a compact text file format (called a Part-21 or P-21 file),
              SQL and object-based database implementations, and XML implementations
              (Part 28 format).
                   Surrounding the STEP standard is a group of software companies provid-
              ing toolkits for implementing and testing software based on EXPRESS. These
              facilitate the various implementations, testing and deployment of STEP based
              exchange capabilities. These include graphical viewers and model navigators,
              testing software, and other implementation tools.

              3.3.1 IFC Relation to STEP
              AEC organizations may participate in TC-184 meetings and initiate STEP AP
              development projects. Also, non-TC184 organizations may use the STEP tech-
              nologies to develop industry-based product data models. There are examples of
              both these approaches in the AEC, all based on the ISO-STEP technology:

                  • AP 225 – Building Elements Using Explicit Shape Representation – the
                    only completed building oriented product data model developed and
                    approved by TC184. It deals with the exchange of building geometry.
                  • IFC – Industry Foundation Classes – an industry-developed product data
                    model for the design and full life cycle of buildings, supported by the IAI.
                  • CIS/2 – CimSteel Integration Standard, Version 2 – is an industry-developed
                    standard for structural steel design, analysis and fabrication, supported by
                    the American Institute of Steel Construction and the Construction Steel
                    Institute of the UK. CIS/2 is widely used and deployed.




c03.indd 71                                                                                                          12/19/07 1:55:33 PM
          72 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                     • AP 241 – Generic Model for Life Cycle Support of AEC Facilities –
                                       addresses industrial facilities, and overlaps with IFC functionality – pro-
                                       posed in 2006 by the German National Committee; and is under review
                                       as a new AP.

                                      AP 225 is used in Europe, mostly in Germany, as an alternative to DXF.
                                 Not many CAD applications support it. The IFC has thus far limited but
                                 growing worldwide use. Most of the BIM design tools support it, to varying
                                 degrees. It is described in more detail in Section 3.3.3. CIS/2 is broadly used
                                 in the North American structural steel fabrication industry. AP 241 is a
                                 recent proposal by the German STEP Committee to develop a product data
                                 model for factories and their components in a fully ISO-STEP compatible
                                 format. A debate is ongoing whether such an effort, parallel to the IFC,
                                 should proceed.
                                      We see that there are multiple building product data models with overlap-
                                 ping functionality. All these data models are defined in the EXPRESS language.
                                 They vary in the AEC information they represent, and how they depict it. IFC
                                 can represent building geometry, as can AP225. There is overlap between
                                 CIS/2 and IFC in the schematic design of structural steel. Because of this over-
                                 lap, but with significant unique capabilities on both sides, harmonization of
                                 IFC and CIS/2 has been undertaken by Georgia Institute of Technology, funded
                                 by AISC. As a result, for steel layout and design, the two product data models
                                 have had their definitions adjusted to be compatible. Also a translator support-
                                 ing common exchange workflows has been developed. The website for this
                                 endeavor is: http://www.arch.gatech.edu/~aisc/cisifc/.

                                 3.3.2 Organization of IAI
                                 The IFC has a fairly long history. In late 1994, Autodesk initiated an industry
                                 consortium to advise the company on the development of a set of C classes
                                 that could support integrated application development. Twelve US companies
                                 joined the consortium. Initially defined as the Industry Alliance for Interoperabil-
                                 ity, the Alliance opened membership to all interested parties in September, 1995
                                 and changed its name in 1997 to the International Alliance for Interoperability.
                                 The new Alliance was reconstituted as a non-profit industry-led international
                                 organization, with the goal of publishing the Industry Foundation Class (IFC)
                                 as a neutral AEC product data model responding to the AEC building lifecycle.
                                 A good historical overview of the IFCs is available on the IAI website:
                                 http://www.iai-international.org/About/History.html.
                                       As of 2006, the IAI has eleven chapters in 19 countries worldwide, with
                                 about 450 corporate members. It is truly an international effort.




c03.indd 72                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:55:34 PM
                                                                              3.3 Background of Product Data Models    73

                  All chapters may participate in Domain Committees, each of which
              addresses one area of the AEC. Currently, the Domains include:

                  • AR – Architecture
                  • BS – Building Services
                  • CM – Construction:
                     ❍   CM1 – Procurement Logistics,
                     ❍CM2 – Temporary Construction
                  • CS – Codes and Standards
                  • ES – Cost Estimating
                  • PM – Project Management
                  • FM – Facility Management
                  • SI – Simulation
                  • ST – Structural Engineering
                  • XM – Cross Domain

                   By participating in a Domain Committee, all members have input to the
              portion of the IFC that corresponds to their interests. Different national
              chapters are focusing on different domains.
                   The International Council Executive Committee is the overall lead organization
              in the IAI, made up of eight members. The North American chapter is adminis-
              tered by NIBS, the National Institute of Building Science, in Washington D.C.


              3.3.3 What Are the IFCs?
              The Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) was developed to create a large set of
              consistent data representations of building information for exchange between
              AEC software applications. It relies on the ISO-STEP EXPRESS language and
              concepts for its definition, with a few minor restrictions on the language. While
              most of the other ISO-STEP efforts focused on detailed software exchanges
              within specific engineering domains, it was thought that in the building industry
              this would lead to piecemeal results and a set of incompatible standards. Instead,
              IFC was designed as an extensible ‘framework model.’ That is, its initial develop-
              ers intended it to provide broad general definitions of objects and data from
              which more detailed and task-specific models supporting particular workflow
              exchanges could be defined. This is characterized in Figure 3-1. In this regard,
              IFC has been designed to address all building information, over the whole building
              lifecycle, from feasibility and planning, through design (including analysis and
              simulation), construction, to occupancy and operation (Khemlani 2004).




c03.indd 73                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:55:34 PM
          74 Chapter 3 Interoperability

          FIGURE 3-1
          IFCs consists of a
          library of object and
          property definitions
          that can be used to
          represent a building
          project and support
          use of that building
          information for
          particular use.
          The figure shows three
          examples of specific
          domain uses from a
          single IFC project:
          (A) An architectural
          view, (B) a mechanical
          system view, and (C)
          a structural view. Also
          shown are (D) a sample
          IFC object or entity and
          sample properties and
          attributes.




                                          As of 2007, the current release of the IFC is Version 2x3. It is available for
                                     review at: http://www.iai-international.org/Model/IFC(ifcXML)Specs.html.
                                          All objects in EXPRESS are called entities. The conceptual organization of
                                     IFC entities is diagrammed in Figure 3-2. At the bottom are twenty-six sets
                                     of base entities, defining the base reusable constructs, such as Geometry,
                                     Topology, Materials, Measurements, Actors, Roles, Presentations and Proper-
                                     ties. These are generic for all types of products and are largely consistent with
                                     ISO-STEP Resources, but with minor extensions.
                                          The base entities are then composed to define commonly used objects in
                                     AEC, termed Shared Objects in IFC model. These include building elements,
                                     such as generic walls, floors, structural elements, building service elements, proc-
                                     ess elements, management elements, and generic features. Because IFC is defined
                                     as an extensible data model and is object-oriented, the base entities can be elabo-
                                     rated and specialized by subtyping * to make any number of sub-entities.
                                          The top-level of the IFC data model are the domain-specific extensions.
                                     These deal with different specific entities needed for a particular use. Thus


                                     *Subtyping provides for defining a new class of building object that ‘inherits’ the properties of
                                     its ‘parent’ class and adds new properties that make it distinct from its parent and any possible
                                     ‘sibling’ classes. IFC superclasses, subclasses and inheritance behavior conform to accepted
                                     principles of object-oriented analysis. For more detail, see (Booch 1993).




c03.indd 74                                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:55:35 PM
                                                                                                                                                  3.3 Background of Product Data Models            75

                Domain Layer                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE 3-2
                (domains)
                                                                                                                                                                              The system
                                                        Building               Plumbing                 Structural               Structural                                   architecture of IFC
                                                        Controls            Fire Protection             Elements                  Analysis
                                                                                                                                                                              subschemas.
                                                                                                                                                                              Each Resource and
                                                                                                                                                                              Core subschema
                                               HVAC                  Electrical          Architecture
                                                                                                                   Construction          Facilities                           has a structure of
                                                                                                                   Management           Management
                                                                                                                                                                              entities for defining
                                                                                                                                                                              models, specified at
                                                                                                                                                                              the Interoperability
                Interoperability Layer
                                                                                                                                                                              and Domain Layers.
                             Shared Building            Shared component              Shared Building               Shared Management             Shared Facilities           Adapted from IAI
                            Services Elements               elements                    Elements                         Elements                    Elements                 international IFC/ifcXML
                                                                                                                                                                              online specifications for
                                                                                                                                                                              IFC2x Edition 3 at http://
                                                                 Control                    Product                       Process                                             www.iai-international.org/
                                                                Extension                  Extension                     Extension
                                                                                                                                                                              Model/R2x3_final/index.
                                                                                                                                                                              htm.
                                                                                              Kernel
                    White entity sets are
                      IFC2x2 platform
                    -IFC2x part equal to                                                                                                               gray entity sets are
                       ISO/PAS 16739                  Core Layer                                                                                       non-platform parts



                    Material                                         External      Geometric      Geometric
                                      Actor         DateTime                                                         Geometry         Material       Measure          Cost
                    Property                                        Reference      Constraint      Model




                Resource Layer                      Profile         Property       Quantity       Representation      Topology          Utility
                (base entitites)




                     Presentation    Presentation    Presentation   Presentation                       Time                                                       Profile
                      Dimension       Apearance       Definition    Organization
                                                                                   Presentation                     Constraint       Approval      Structural
                                                                                                       Series                                                    Property




              there are Structural Elements and Structural Analysis extensions, Architec-
              tural, Electrical, HVAC, Building Control element extensions.
                  Each of the geometric shapes in the system architecture diagram in Figure
              3-2 identifies a set of EXPRESS language entities, enumerations, and types.
              The architecture thus provides a type of indexing system into the IFC model,
              which is also defined in EXPRESS. The IFC model is quite large and still grow-
              ing. As of the current release 2x3, there are 383 Kernel-level entities, 150
              shared entities in the middle level, and 114 domain-specific entities in the top
              level.
                  Given the IFC hierarchical object subtyping structure, the objects used in
              exchanges are nested within a deep sub-entity tree. For example, a wall entity
              has a trace down the tree:

                                    IfcRoot → IfcObjectDefinition → IfcProduct → IfcElement →
                                                 IfcBuildingElement → IfcWall




c03.indd 75                                                                                                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:55:36 PM
          76 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                      Each level of the tree introduces different attributes and relations to the
                                 wall entity. IfcRoot assigns a Global ID and other identifier information. IfcOb-
                                 jectDefinition optionally places the wall as part of a more aggregate assembly,
                                 and also identifies the components of the wall, if these are defined. IfcProduct
                                 defines the location of the wall and its shape. IfcElement carries the relation-
                                 ship of this element with others, such as wall bounding relationships, and also
                                 the spaces (including exterior space) that the wall separates. It also carries any
                                 openings within the wall and optionally their filling by doors or windows. Many
                                 of these attributes and relations are optional, allowing implementers to exclude
                                 some of the information from their export routines.
                                      Products, including walls, may have multiple shape representations,
                                 depending upon their intended uses. Within the IFC, almost all objects
                                 are within a composition hierarchy defined by IfcObjectDefinition; that is,
                                 they are both part of a composition and have their own components. IFC also
                                 has a general purpose IfcRelation, which has different kinds of relations as
                                 subtypes, one of which is IfcRelConnects, which in turn has the subclass IfcRel-
                                 ConnectswithRealizing that is used to reference wall connections. This one
                                 example indicates the extensiveness of the IFC model. This type of approach is
                                 followed for all IFC modeled objects.


                                 3.3.4 IFC Coverage
                                 While the IFC is able to represent a wide range of building design, engineering,
                                 and production information, the range of possible information to be exchanged
                                 in the AEC industry is huge. The IFC coverage increases with every release and
                                 addresses limitations, in response to user and developer needs. Here we sum-
                                 marize the major coverage and limitations as of early 2007.
                                      All application-defined objects, when translated to an IFC model, are com-
                                 posed of the relevant object type and associated geometry, relations and
                                 properties. It is in the area of geometry, relations and properties that most
                                 limitations are encountered. In addition to objects that make up a building,
                                 IFC also includes process objects for representing the activities used to con-
                                 struct a building, and analysis properties, which are the input and results of
                                 running various analyses.
                                      Geometry: The IFC has means to represent a fairly wide range of geometry,
                                 including extrusions, solids defined by a closed connected set of faces (B-Reps),
                                 and shapes defined by a tree of shapes and union-intersection operations
                                 (Constructive Solid Geometry). Surfaces may be those defined by extruded
                                 shapes (including those extruded along a curve) and Bezier surfaces. These
                                 cover most construction needs. IFC omits shapes constructed of multi-curved




c03.indd 76                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:55:36 PM
                                                                            3.3 Background of Product Data Models    77

              surfaces, such as B-splines and non-uniform B-splines (NURBS) that can be
              defined in design applications such as Rhino®, Form-Z®, Maya®, Digital Project
              and some Bentley applications. In these cases, a shape with these surfaces will
              be translated with missing surfaces and possibly other errors. These errors
              must be recognized, and then the geometry managed in some other manner –
              by changing the geometry representation in the exporting application, for
              example. In most applications, the conversion from NURBS surfaces to meshes
              is automatic, but one way. The IFC geometry was designed to support exchange
              of simple parametric models between systems, such as wall systems and
              extruded shapes. However, few translators have made use of these capabilities
              and their power is just beginning to be explored.
                   Relations: Care has been taken in the IFC data model to represent a rich
              set of relations between objects in some BIM design tool for translation into
              IFC. They are defined according to abstract classification as:

                  • Assigns – deals with relations between heterogeneous objects and a
                    group, or selection of parts of assemblies for particular uses; for exam-
                    ple, all entity instances installed by a particular trade may be referenced
                    by the assigns relation;
                  • Decomposes – is the general relation dealing with composition and
                    decomposition, of assemblies and their parts;
                  • Associates – relates shared project information, such as external equip-
                    ment specifications, with model instances; an example may be a modeled
                    piece of mechanical equipment which ‘associates’ with its specification
                    in the supplier’s catalog;
                  • Defines – deals with the relation between a shared description of an
                    object and the various instances of that object, for example a description
                    of a window type and the various instances of the window;
                  • Connects – defines a general topological relationship between two
                    objects, which is defined functionally by subclasses. For example walls
                    have ‘connects’ with their bounding walls, floors or ceilings.

                   There are many subclasses of IfcRelations covering almost any desired
              relation. No omissions are known.
                   Properties: IFC places emphasis on property sets, or P-sets. These are sets
              of properties that are used together to define material, performance, and con-
              textual properties, e.g., wind, geological or weather data. There are collected
              P-sets for many types of building objects, such as common roof, wall, window
              glazing, window, beam, reinforcement. In addition, many properties are




c03.indd 77                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:55:37 PM
          78 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                 associated with different material behaviors, such as for thermal material,
                                 products of combustion, mechanical properties, fuels, concrete, and others.
                                 IFC includes properties for costs, time, quantity takeoffs, spaces, fire safety,
                                 building use, site use and others.
                                      Several omissions can be identified. There are very limited properties
                                 for specialized space functions, such as required for security in public build-
                                 ings or functional zoning, as in a theater. Measurements lack tolerance
                                 properties; there is no explicit way to represent uncertainty. In such cases,
                                 options are available to define and depict user-defined property sets. These
                                 must be managed by user agreement, as they are not yet built into the
                                 specification.
                                      Meta-properties: IFC designers have thought about the use of information
                                 over time and the meta-data needed to deal with information management. IFC
                                 is strong in addressing information ownership, identification, change manage-
                                 ment and tracking of changes, controls and approvals. IFC also has capabilities
                                 to define constraints and objectives for describing intent. However, we are not
                                 aware of these capabilities being used.
                                      The IFC has well-developed object classes for buildings at the contracting
                                 level of detail. In general, it currently is weak in representing the details needed
                                 for fabrication and manufacturing. It only partially addresses reinforcing in
                                 concrete, metal welds and their specification, concrete mix and finish defini-
                                 tion, or fabrication details for window wall systems, for example. This level of
                                 detail may either be defined in more detailed product data models, such as
                                 CIS/2, or they may be added to IFC later.
                                      These different descriptions are brought together to describe the informa-
                                 tion represented in some design application, or to be received by a building
                                 application from some other application or repository. The current limitations
                                 are in no way intrinsic, but reflect the priority needs of users up to now. If
                                 extensions are needed to deal with the limitations noted, these can be added,
                                 through a regularly scheduled extension process.


                                 3.3.5 IFC in Use
                                 A typical data exchange scenario is shown in Figure 3-3. A Source Application
                                 has modeled information to be used by a Receiving Application. The source
                                 application has a translator written for it that extracts information instances
                                 from the application’s native data structure and assigns them to appropriate
                                 IFC entity classes. The entity instance data are then mapped from the IFC
                                 objects into (in this case) a text file format defined by the ISO-STEP Part-21.
                                 This file is then received by the other application and interpreted by the
                                 Receiving Application’s translator in terms of the IFC object instances it




c03.indd 78                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:55:37 PM
                                                                                    3.3 Background of Product Data Models    79

                                                                                                           FIGURE 3-3
                          Source                                                  Receiving                A scenario of the most
                        Application                                              Application               common type of IFC
                                                                                                           exchange between two
                                                      Data
                                                                                                           applications.
                                                    Exchange                        Import
                           Export
                         Translator                  Part 21                      Translator


                            Data         P-21                         P-21           Data
                          Structure    Translator                   Translator     Structure




                                                         IFC
                                                    Product Model
                                                        View




              represents. The translator in the Receiving Application writes the relevant IFC
              objects into its native data structure for use.
                    Different BIM tools have their own proprietary data structures for repre-
              senting a building and other design information. Some explicitly store proper-
              ties and relations, while others compute them on demand. They internally use
              different geometric representations. Thus, two building modeling tools can
              both have perfectly good IFC translators to export and import data, but may
              still be able to exchange very little useful data. The translator’s capabilities and
              object coverage are supposed to be defined in the translator’s documentation.
              For these reasons, IFC model exchange currently needs careful initial testing to
              determine what information is carried by the exchanging applications.

              IFC Viewers
              A number of companies have developed geometry and geometry-and-properties
              viewers for IFC models. Most of these are freely available for downloading.
                  Available IFC Geometry and Property Viewers:

                  DDS IfcViewer, at: http://www.dds.no (free)
                  IfcStoreyView, at: http://www.iai.fzk.de/ifc (free)
                  IFC Engine Viewer, at: http://www.ifcviewer.com (free)
                  ISPRAS IFC/VRML Converter, at: http://www.ispras.ru/~step (free)
                  Octaga Modeler, at: http://www.octaga.com (commercial)
                  Solibri Model Viewer™, at: http://www.solibri.com/ (free)




c03.indd 79                                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:55:38 PM
          80 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                     Some viewers display the attributes of selected objects and provide means
                                 to turn on and off sets of entities. IFC viewers are useful for debugging IFC
                                 translators, and to verify what data has been translated.

                                 IFC Views
                                 Because of the variable representation of objects in IFC, two parallel and
                                 related efforts are being undertaken to define IFC subsets more precisely. In
                                 both cases, data exchanges are prescribed in terms of particular tasks and
                                 workflows. The American effort is the National BIM Standard (NBIMS), initi-
                                 ated by the Facilities Information Council, an organization of US government
                                 procurement and facility management groups—within the Department of
                                 Defense—and administered through the National Institute of Building Sci-
                                 ences (NIBS). The European effort is being led by Norway, developing an
                                 Information Delivery Manual (IDM). Both of these efforts are directed toward
                                 specifying IFC Views—specific subsets of the IFC—to be used for specific
                                 workflow exchanges. Both groups rely on the buildingSMART ™ name, recently
                                 adopted by the IAI for promoting the IFC (IAI 2007).
                                      In the USA, the plan for development and implementation of IFC Views is
                                 to encourage different business domains within the construction industry to
                                 identify data exchanges that, if automated, would provide high value payoffs.
                                 These would be specified at a functional level by the AEC business domain.
                                 The assumption is that building associations, such as the American Institute of
                                 Architects, Associated General Contractors, Precast Concrete Institute, Port-
                                 land Cement Association, American Institute of Steel Construction and other
                                 institutions would represent the business domains. Once specified, the business
                                 domain, working with the NIBS-buildingSMART® organization, would fund
                                 information technology specialists to specify the IFC Views to be exchanged,
                                 and to develop the functional specifications. Last, NIBS-buildingSMART® and
                                 the AEC domain will work with the BIM software tool developers to imple-
                                 ment the View translators. There is also discussion of certification.
                                      When these specific workflow-based translators are implemented, they
                                 will be explicitly incorporated into translators, based on either P-21 files or
                                 database queries. Some views are being defined for one-way passing of a data-
                                 set, while others are anticipating multiple iterated exchanges, such as might be
                                 desired between a design and an analysis tool to allow interactive performance
                                 improvement of the design. These Views, when certified, will add significantly
                                 to the robustness of IFC exchanges and eliminate the need for pre-testing and
                                 exchanges, as is required today.
                                      A possible example of a fine-grain workflow exchange is shown in Figure 3-4,
                                 showing exchanges between building designers and structural engineers. Six




c03.indd 80                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:55:38 PM
                                                                                          3.3 Background of Product Data Models       81

                                              Request for design information(ST-1)                                 FIGURE 3-4
                                              Candidate building design(ST-2)                                      Example workflows
                                                                                                                   between building
                                                                                                                   designer and structural
                                                          Acquire Building                                         engineer.
                                                              Design

                                                                               (Task transfer in same software)
                       Building Design                       Define/Edit
                        Development                       Structural Design

                     Building Design                                           Send to structural analysis(ST-3)
                                                                               Return analysis results(ST-4)
              Revised building design(ST-5)               Analyze Structure
                                                          Structural Design
              Candidate structural design(ST-6)




              information exchanges are detailed, denoted in the figure as (ST-1) to (ST-6).
              These include three iterated exchanges: (1) first to lay out the structural sys-
              tem conceptually (ST-1 and ST-2); (2) the structural engineer undertaking iter-
              ated analyses to develop a good design based on the engineer’s knowledge of
              the project, (ST-3 and ST-4), and (3) exchanges between the designer and the
              structural engineer, coordinating details with the rest of the building systems
              and reflecting design intent (ST-5 and ST-6). The structural engineer option-
              ally has two applications, a structural design application, such as Revit®
              Structures, Bentley Structures or Tekla Structures, and a structural analysis
              application. In many cases (ST-3) and (ST-4) will be directly integrated through
              the applications’ APIs. Of course, coverage of all relevant AEC domain
              exchanges will require definition of hundreds of workflows, each with different
              intent and data.

              IFC Initiatives
              At this point in time (2007) there are significant efforts to apply the IFC in
              various parts of the world:

                   • CORENET is driven by the Singaporean Building and Construction
                     Authority in collaboration with other public and private organiza-
                     tions. It is a major initiative to re-engineer the business processes of
                     the construction industry to integrate the major processes of a build-
                     ing project life cycle: supported by key infrastructures, supporting
                     electronic submission and recording, checking and approval processes,
                     communication methods for dealing with submittal, paperwork,
                     and recording of the review, as well as documentation and training
                     (CORENET 2007).




c03.indd 81                                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:55:39 PM
          82 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                     • Australia is undertaking a similar effort as Singapore, under the trade-
                                       mark of DesignCheck™ (Ding et al. 2006).
                                     • The International Code Council in the US has developed a plan that goes
                                       down a different path from the CORENET efforts, called SMARTcodes
                                       (ICC 2007).
                                     • The Norwegian government and construction industry are working
                                       together to initiate changes in their construction industry, including build-
                                       ing control (automatic code checking), planning (e-submission of building
                                       plans), and integration in design, procure, build, and facility management.
                                       Their initiative is also called BuildingSmart® and there are efforts to coor-
                                       dinate the two similarly named but different parallel efforts. The Nor-
                                       wegian one is expected to produce a significant impact on the efficiency,
                                       productivity and quality of the construction industry. See “Industry Initia-
                                       tives and Norwegian Solution” at http://www.iai-international.org/.
                                     • The General Services Administration of the US government has
                                       undertaken a series of BIM demonstration projects, addressing various
                                       applications, many relying on exchanges based on the IFC. These are
                                       described on the same IAI website above, under Industry Solutions,
                                       GSA Pilots.
                                     • Based on these demonstrations, all GSA building projects starting in
                                       2007 are to utilize BIM design tools and use of an exported model in IFC
                                       format to support checking of the preliminary concept design against
                                       the specific project’s programmatic spatial requirements. This is the
                                       initial functional application of BIM being mandated in the US. Other
                                       mandated applications are in development. Further requirements will
                                       be introduced in succeeding years. These activities have led to the draft
                                       development of GSA BIM guidelines to be followed for all new GSA
                                       projects (GSA 2007).

                                    Additional initiatives are being undertaken in Finland, Denmark, Germany,
                                 Korea, Japan, China and other countries.


                                 3.3.6 Implications of IFC Use
                                 As the IFC data model becomes adopted by various governmental organiza-
                                 tions for code checking and design review (as being undertaken by GSA and in
                                 Singapore), it will have an increasingly strong impact on aspects of architec-
                                 tural and contractor practice. This impact simultaneously affects users and
                                 BIM design tool developers.
                                     The completion of a set of contract drawings in traditional practice imposes
                                 a level of rigor and discipline in the final generation of those drawings. This




c03.indd 82                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:55:39 PM
                                                                            3.3 Background of Product Data Models    83

              discipline and rigor will increase even more significantly in the creation and
              definition of building models used for code checking and design review.
                  An early example of this required rigor are the GSA submittal require-
              ments for checking building area calculations against the building’s program
              (GSA 2006), calculated according to the ANSI-BOMA space calculation meth-
              ods (ANSI 1996). In order to carry out this type of check, the building model
              must have the following information available:

                  • All rooms and spaces must be labeled in a manner consistent with the
                    space program
                  • The 3D boundaries of all spaces must be defined by their bounding
                    surfaces and closed in a manner allowing area and volume calculation
                  • If the BIM design tool does not automatically calculate and maintain
                    the consistency of the space volumes and areas, these must be created
                    and maintained by the user, in the manner consistent with the ANSI-
                    BOMA area calculation method. The final area calculation is made by
                    the reviewing application, so that this is guaranteed to be done in a
                    consistent manner.


                   These requirements indicate that future firms will have to carefully pre-
              pare and possibly pre-check their model structure to make sure it is modeled
              appropriately for automatic review. Programs already exist to do this checking
              for the GSA BIM uses. For example, a check can be run that all of the spaces
              are tagged as closed spaces with appropriate codes defining their intended
              function.
                   Currently design reviews are being performed on conceptual design phase
              models that do not include materials, hardware or detailing, or the review
              ignores such building model information. Later more elaborate types of test-
              ing for other programmatic issues will apply to more detailed design, and
              finally full construction level models. Most building models today do not carry
              design in 3D to the level of interior finishes and use 2D sections to represent
              such details (see Figure 2-13). This practice will have to be coordinated with
              the expected reviews and other uses of the models and the accuracy of results
              expected.
                   This rigor also applies to interfaces with analysis applications and to the
              hand-off between a design BIM tool and fabrication-level ones. The broader
              implication is that special care will be required in the definition of a building
              information model, because the information will be used by other applications.
              There will be a great difference between the sketch models often developed
              today for design review or rendering, and the rigorously crafted building mod-
              els used for analysis and design review in the future.




c03.indd 83                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:55:39 PM
          84 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                 3.3.7 The Future of IFC
                                 The IFC is the only public, non-proprietary and well-developed data model for
                                 buildings and architecture existing today. It is a de facto standard worldwide and
                                 is being formally adopted by different governments and agencies in various parts
                                 of the world. It is being picked up and used for a growing number of uses, in
                                 both the public and private sectors. In the 2007 AIA BIM Awards program,
                                 administered by the Technology in Architectural Practice Knowledge Commu-
                                 nity, six of 32 project submissions included use of the IFC. While these are
                                 meant to provide examples of best use, it does indicate a broad take-up of IFC
                                 usage.
                                      The IFC data model standard is continuously evolving. A new version with
                                 extensions is released every two years. The extensions are undertaken in two
                                 phases. First, various domain-specific teams are assembled around specific
                                 issues or targeted use – say structural analysis or reinforced concrete construc-
                                 tion. A group carefully generates a set of requirements. Then a candidate exten-
                                 sion to the IFC is generated and proposed by modeling experts. The extension is
                                 voted on and approved by its participants. Later, the different extensions that
                                 have been made over a two year cycle are collected and then integrated in a
                                 logical way by the Model Support Group (MSG) to provide consistent exten-
                                 sions for the next release. The IFC release is documented and distributed and
                                 reviewed with the AEC software firms, who then develop translator implemen-
                                 tations of the IFC model extensions, which are then tested for certification.
                                 Certification until recently has been at the IFC Release level, where some
                                 subset of IFC entities are correctly read and/or written, and the capabilities
                                 documented.
                                      Because the IFC Views supporting various specific exchanges are just now
                                 being developed in the National BIM Standard and in Europe by building
                                 SMART®, the current IFC translators are often lacking in needed reliability
                                 without extensive pre-testing. These limitations are expected to recede as IFC
                                 Views are defined and implemented. The IFC and NBIMS efforts are currently
                                 being undertaken with minimal funding and much volunteer effort. The level
                                 of support may become an Achilles’ heel of the widespread use of this impor-
                                 tant technology.



                                      3.4 XML SCHEMAS

                                 An alternative way to exchange data is through XML. XML is an extension to
                                 HTML, the language used to send information over the Web. HTML has a
                                 fixed set of tags (a tag tells what kind of data follows) and has focused on




c03.indd 84                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:55:40 PM
                                                                                               3.4 XML Schemas    85

              presentation, different kinds of media and other types of fixed format Web
              data. XML expands upon HTML by providing user-defined tags to specify an
              intended meaning for data transmitted, allowing user-defined schemas. XML
              has become very popular for exchange of information between Web applica-
              tions, e.g., to support ecommerce transactions or collect data.
                   There are multiple methods for defining custom tags, including Docu-
              ment Type Declarations (DTDs). DTDs have been developed for mathemati-
              cal formulas, vector graphics and business processes, among many others.
              There are other ways to define XML schemas, including XML Schema (http://
              www.w3.org/XML/Schema), RDF (Resource Description Framework)
              (http://www.w3.org/RDF/) and OWL Web Ontology Language (http://www
              .w3.org/TR/2004/REC-owl-features-20040210/). Research is proceeding to
              develop even more powerful tools around XML and more powerful schemas,
              based on precise semantic definitions called ontologies, but practical results
              for these more advanced approaches has thus far been limited.
                   Using current readily available schema definition languages, some effec-
              tive XML schemas and processing methods have been developed in AEC areas.
              Five of them are described in the box that follows:



                XML Schemas in AEC Areas
                    OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium) has developed the OpenGIS®
                    Geographic Objects (GO) Implementation Specification. It defines
                    an open set of common, language-independent abstractions for
                    describing, managing, rendering, and manipulating geometric and
                    geographic objects within an application programming environment
                    (OGC 2007).
                    gbXML (Green Building XML) is a schema developed to transfer
                    information needed for preliminary energy analysis of building enve-
                    lopes, zones and mechanical equipment simulation (gbXML 2007).
                    aecXML is administered by FIATECH, a major construction indus-
                    try consortium supporting AEC research, and the IAI. It can rep-
                    resent resources such as contract and project documents (Request
                    for Proposal (RFP), Request for Quotation (RFQ), Request for
                    Information (RFI), specifications, addenda, change orders, contracts,
                    purchase orders), attributes, materials and parts, products, equip-
                    ment; meta data such as organizations, professionals, participants; or
                                                                            (Continued)




c03.indd 85                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:55:40 PM
          86 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                    XML Schemas in AEC Areas (Continued)
                                          activities such as proposals, projects, design, estimating, scheduling
                                          and construction. It carries descriptions and specifications of build-
                                          ings and their components, but does not geometrically or analytically
                                          model them (FIATECH 2007).
                                          IFCXML is a subset of the IFC schema mapped to XML, supported
                                          by IAI. It also relies on XML Schema for its mapping. It currently
                                          supports the following use cases: Material Catalogs, Bill of Quanti-
                                          ties and adding User Design Quantities. Support for additional use
                                          cases are planned (IAI 2007a).
                                          BLIS-XML is a subset of the IFC Release 2.0, developed to support
                                          a small number of use cases. It was developed in 2001–2002 in an
                                          effort to get into use a practical and productive version of the IFC.
                                          BLIS-XML uses the BLIS schema with a schema converter developed
                                          by Secom Co. Ltd. (BLIS 2002).



                                      The Associated General Contractors (AGC) has announced that it will
                                 develop agcXML, a schema for its construction business processes. It was
                                 under development at the time this book was written.
                                      Each of these different XML schemas defines its’ own entities, attributes and
                                 relations. They work well to support work among a group of collaborating firms
                                 that implement a schema and develop applications around it. However, each of
                                 the XML schemas is different and incompatible. IFCXML provides a global
                                 mapping to the IFC building data model, for cross-referencing. The OGC GIS
                                 schema is being harmonized with IFC efforts. XML formatting takes more space
                                 than, say, IFC clear text files (between 2 and 6 times more space). The longer
                                 term issue is to harmonize the other XML schemas with equivalence mappings
                                 between them and with data model representations. The analogy is when the
                                 railroads in the US all rapidly built tracks over the country, each with their own
                                 gage; they worked fine within their own community, but could not link up.



                                      3.5 PORTABLE, WEB-BASED FORMATS: DWF AND PDF

                                 Two widely available formats are 3D PDF (Portable Document Format) devel-
                                 oped by Adobe® and DWF (Design Web Format) developed by Autodesk®.
                                 These two formats support a ‘publishing’ information workflow and do not
                                 address the interoperability issues supported by IFC and the XML schemas




c03.indd 86                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:55:41 PM
                                                                 3.6 File Exchange Versus Building Model Repositories    87

              discussed in the previous section. That is, these Web formats provide design
              and engineering professionals with a way to publish the building information
              model for review and viewing, with markup and query capabilities; but not to
              enable modification of the model information. The widespread availability of
              these formats is likely to lead to their playing a significant role in the exchange
              and viewing of project information. Here is a brief overview of some of the
              features of these formats (see Chapter 4 for a more comparative and detailed
              discussion of their role in BIM implementation):

                  • Generic, non-domain specific, and extensible schema: These formats
                    do not have domain-specific schemas, rather they have schemas with
                    general classes of entities, from geometric polygonal entities and solid
                    entities to markup objects and sheet objects. These formats are designed
                    to meet the broad needs of engineering and design disciplines including
                    manufacturing and the AEC industry. PDF was originally designed
                    for exchange of textual-based documents and extended the format to
                    include support for U3D (Universal 3D) elements. The DWF schema
                    was designed specifically for exchange of intelligent design data and is
                    based upon Microsoft’s XML-based XPS (XML paper specification)
                    format and extensions, allowing anyone to add objects, classes, views,
                    and behaviors. Although PDF is an ISO standard, neither DWF nor the
                    3D PDF extensions are ISO standards.
                  • Embedded views of the project information: Both formats represent the
                    model data and views of that data. Data views include 2D plot views,
                    3D model views, or raster image views. The 2D and 3D model represen-
                    tations are fully navigable, selectable and support queries. They include
                    object meta-data, but object parameters are not editable.
                  • Widely available viewing tools: Both formats are distributed with free,
                    publicly available viewers.
                  • High fidelity, accuracy, and precision: Both formats were designed for
                    plot-capable printing with high degrees of accuracy and precision.
                  • Highly compressible: Both formats are optimized for portability and are
                    highly compressible. IFC and many of the other XML or 3D formats
                    are not.


                   3.6 FILE EXCHANGE VERSUS BUILDING MODEL
                       REPOSITORIES

              Production use of IFC-based data exchange and XML-based e-business
              exchanges have begun with file exchanges. Quickly, however, people are




c03.indd 87                                                                                                             12/19/07 1:55:41 PM
          88 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                    learning that management of the versions, updating, and change management
                                    of the data associated with an increasingly complex number of heterogeneous
                                    applications, leads to major data management challenges. Issues that arise that
                                    are best resolved by repositories:

                                        • Supporting exchanges between multiple concurrent applications that
                                          both read and write project data; that is, the workflows are not linear
                                        • Propagating and managing changes that impact multiple application
                                          datasets
                                        • When there are multiple authoring applications that must be merged
                                          for later use
                                        • Supporting very frequent or realtime coordination between multiple
                                          application users.

                                         The technology associated with the resolution of these types of issues,
                                    and also the smoothing of exchange of data between combinations of appli-
                                    cations, is a building model repository. A building model repository is a
                                    database system whose schema is based on a published object based format.
                                    It is different from existing project data management (PDM) systems and
                                    web-based project management systems in that the PDM systems are file
                                    based, and carry CAD and analysis package project files. Building model
                                    repositories are object-based, allowing query, transfer, updating and man-
                                    agement of individual project objects from a potentially heterogeneous set of
                                    applications. The only broad building level object schema is the IFC, (but
                                    also CIS/2 and AP225 could be used for limited applications – see Section
                                    3.3.1). A number of companies have developed building model repositories
                                    using the IFCs.
                                                                            An IFC repository can support integra-
                                                                       tion of the data generated by multiple
              Ar
               Current building model                                  applications for use in other applications,
               repositories available:                                 support iterations on parts of the design,
                                                                       and track changes at the object level. They
               • Jotne EDM Model Server
                                                                       provide access control, version manage-
               • LKSoft IDA STEP Database                              ment, and various levels of design history,
               • EuroSTEP Model Server                                 relating the various geometric, material,
               • EuroSTEP SABLE Server                                 and performance data that represent a
               • Oracle Collaborative Building Information             building (Eurostep 2007; Jotne 2007).
                 Management                                                 While basic capabilities exist today,
                                                                       development is ongoing to provide a range




c03.indd 88                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:55:41 PM
                                                                   3.6 File Exchange Versus Building Model Repositories    89

              of effective services for building model repositories. Some early supporting
              software includes:

                  • viewers for inspecting the geometrical and property data in building
                    model repositories (see Section 3.3.5);
                  • checking product data model repositories, for logical correctness (‘build-
                    ing spell- and grammar-checking’), for building program checking, or
                    building code checking (CORENET 2007; Jotne 2007; Solibri 2007).


                   Future areas where repositories are expected to provide important services
              include: dataset preparation for multiple analyses, such as energy analyses of
              building shells, of interior energy distribution and mechanical equipment sim-
              ulation; bills of material and procurement tracking; construction management;
              building commissioning; facility management and operations. Some of these
              issues are explored in Section 4.5.5.
                   In practice, each design participant and application is not involved with the
              complete representation of the building’s design and construction. Each partici-
              pant is interested in only a subset of the building information model, defined as
              particular views of the building model. Similarly, coordination does not apply
              universally; only a few users need to know reinforcing layouts inside concrete or
              weld specifications. It is still an open question, then, as to whether there is a need
              for a single integrated database, or instead, multiple federated databases that can
              provide limited specific consistency checking between dispersed models.
                   This issue is further complicated by the challenges with storing the required
              data in the appropriate format to archive and recreate the native project files
              required by the various BIM authoring tools. The neutral format that repositor-
              ies carry data in is inadequate to recreate the native data formats used by
              applications, except in a few limited cases. Today, these can only be re-created
              from the native application datasets themselves. This is due to the basic het-
              erogeneity of the built-in behavior in the parametric modeling design tools
              (described in Section 2.2.7). Thus any neutral format exchange information,
              such as IFC model data, must be augmented by or associated with the native
              project files produced by the BIM authoring tools. While the future for manag-
              ing project data, especially for large projects, seems to belong to building model
              repositories, many issues remain to be sorted out for their effective use.
                   Other industries have recognized the need for product model servers.
              Their implementation in the largest industries – electronics, manufacturing,
              and aerospace — has led to a major industry involving Product Lifecycle Man-
              agement (PLM). These systems are custom engineered for a single company and




c03.indd 89                                                                                                               12/19/07 1:55:42 PM
          90 Chapter 3 Interoperability

                                 typically involve system integration of a set of tools including product model
                                 management, inventory management, material and resource tracking and
                                 scheduling, among others. They rely on supporting model data in one of a few
                                 proprietary native formats, possibly augmented by ISO-STEP based exchanges.
                                 These have penetrated only the largest businesses, because the current business
                                 model of PLM is based on system integration services. What is not available
                                 is a ready-to-use product that can support medium or small scale organizations
                                 that dominate the make-up of construction industry firms. Thus the medium
                                 and small industries – in both construction and manufacturing - are waiting for
                                 PLM systems that can be easily tailored for various kinds of use.



                                                                3.7 SUMMARY

                                 Some different popular exchange formats and their capabilities in terms of geom-
                                 etry, on one axis, and modeling power on the other, are diagrammed in Figure
                                 3-5. It indicates both our current status and frustrations. The overall issues of


          FIGURE 3-5
          Comparison of
          different project
                                                                    rules                                                                        Native BIM Formats
          data exchange                                                                                                                          DWG, RVT, DGN,
          formats according                                                                                                                             GSM
          to the geometry
          supported and                                          object
                                                                                                                                                IFC
          their attributes and                                  relations                                                                      CIS/2




                                   Structure and Intelligence
          associativity.
                                                                                                                                          DWF

                                                                    objects
                                                                                                                                    PDF 3D

                                                                                                                                 game


                                                                    attributes
                                                                                                                                formats
                                                                                     PDF                                DXF




                                                                    textures
                                                                                                                               3DS
                                                                                                                               OBJ
                                                                                                                              VRML



                                                                    colors
                                                                                      Image
                                                                                 (raster formats)
                                                                                       JPEG

                                                                                                                                                       parametric
                                                                                    pixels          2D lines   2D polygon 3D meshes          solids
                                                                                                                                                        familes
                                                                                                                     Geometry




c03.indd 90                                                                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:55:42 PM
                                                                                                   3.7 Summary    91

              interoperability are not yet resolved. Some people claim that IFC and public
              standards are the only resolution, while others say that the move by public stand-
              ards to resolve outstanding issues is too slow and proprietary solutions are
              preferable.
                   In the last three years, significant movement has been made in both direc-
              tions. On the one hand, all BIM design tools now support IFC fairly well,
              allowing basic exchanges to be made with adequate completeness and accu-
              racy. Only a few exchanges allow editing; most only static viewing. There is a
              small movement for using IFC for analysis interfaces, but these too are just
              becoming available. Various XML schemas are being used for different busi-
              ness exchanges. On the other side, formats such as DWF and PDF hold the
              potential to become richer and support exchange as well as viewing. (Both
              have XML capabilities.) We expect to see both approaches co-exist, side by
              side. But we are all actors in this decision, both through purchase decisions
              and advocacy. Users’ and owners’ wishes will prevail.




                Chapter 3 Discussion Questions
                             1. What are the major differences between DXF as an
                                exchange format and an object-based one like IFC?
                             2. Choose a design or engineering application that has no
                                effective interface with a BIM design tool you use. Identify
                                the types of information the BIM design tool needs to send
                                to this application.
                             3. Extend this to think what might be returned to the BIM
                                design tool, as a result of running this application?
                             4. Take a simple design of some simple object, such as a
                                Lego sculpture. Using IFC, define the IFC entities needed
                                to represent the design. Check the description using an
                                EXPRESS parser, such as the free EXPRESS-O checker
                                available from the Sourceforge open software website.
                             5. For one or more of the coordination activities below,
                                identify the information that needs to be exchanged in
                                both directions:
                                 a. building design that is informed by energy analysis of
                                    the building shell.
                                                                                (Continued)




c03.indd 91                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:55:44 PM
          92 Chapter 3 Interoperability


                                    Chapter 3 Discussion Questions (Continued)
                                               b. building design that is informed by a structural analysis.
                                               c. steel fabrication level model that coordinates with a
                                                  shop scheduling and materials tracking application.
                                               d. cast-in-place concrete design that is informed by a
                                                  modular formwork system.
                                           6. What are the distinguishing functional capabilities
                                              provided by a Building Model Repository and database
                                              as compared to a file-based system?
                                           7. Explain why file exchange between design systems
                                              using IFC can result in errors. How would these errors be
                                              detected?




c03.indd 92                                                                                                12/19/07 1:55:44 PM
              CHAPTER                          4
              BIM for Owners and Facility
              Managers



                     4.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                    wners can realize significant benefits on projects by using BIM processes
              O     and tools to streamline the delivery of higher quality and better perform-
              ing buildings. BIM facilitates collaboration between project participants,
              reducing errors and field changes and leading to a more efficient and reliable
              delivery process that reduces project time and cost. There are many potential
              areas for BIM contributions. Owners can use a building information model to:

                   • Increase building value through BIM-based energy design and analysis
                     to improve overall building performance
                   • Shorten project schedule from approval to completion by using build-
                     ing models to coordinate and prefabricate design with reduced field
                     labor time
                   • Obtain reliable and accurate cost estimates through automatic quantity
                     take-off from the building model, providing feedback earlier in a project
                     when decisions will have the greatest impact
                   • Assure program compliance through ongoing analysis of the building
                     model against owner and local code requirements
                   • Produce market-ready facilities by reducing time between procurement
                     decisions and actual construction, allowing for the selection of the latest
                     technologies or trend finishes
              BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
              Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   93



c04.indd 93                                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:57:04 PM
         94 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                    • Optimize facility management and maintenance by using the as-built
                                      building information model as the database for rooms, spaces, and
                                      equipment.

                                     These benefits are available to all types of owners: small and large, serial
                                or one-time builders, private or institutional. Owners have yet to realize all of
                                the benefits associated with BIM or employ all of the tools and processes dis-
                                cussed in this book. Significant changes in the delivery process, selection of
                                service providers, and approach to projects are necessary to fully realize BIM’s
                                benefits. Today, owners are rewriting contract language, specifications, and
                                project requirements to incorporate the use of BIM processes and technologies
                                into their projects as much as possible. Owners investing in BIM efforts
                                are reaping advantages in the marketplace through the delivery of higher value
                                facilities and reduced operational costs. In concert with these changes, some
                                owners are actively leading efforts to implement BIM tools on their projects by
                                facilitating and supporting BIM education and research.



                                     4.1 INTRODUCTION: WHY OWNERS SHOULD
                                         CARE ABOUT BIM

                                Lean processes and digital modeling have revolutionized the manufacturing
                                and aerospace industries. Early adopters of these production processes and
                                tools, such as Toyota and Boeing, have achieved manufacturing efficiencies
                                and commercial successes (Laurenzo 2005). Late adopters were forced to
                                catch-up in order to compete; and although they may not have encountered the
                                technical hurdles experienced by early adopters, they still faced significant
                                changes to their work processes.
                                     The AEC industry is facing a similar revolution, requiring both process
                                changes and a paradigm shift from 2D-based documentation and staged
                                delivery processes to a digital prototype and collaborative workflow. The
                                foundation of BIM is a coordinated and information-rich building model with
                                capabilities for virtual prototyping, analysis, and virtual construction of a
                                project. These tools broadly enhance today’s CAD capabilities with an improved
                                ability to link design information with business processes, such as estimating,
                                sales forecasts, and operations. With drawing-based processes, analyses must
                                be done independently of the building design information, often requiring
                                duplicate, tedious, and error-prone data entry. The result is loss of value in
                                information assets across phases and increased effort to produce project infor-
                                mation, as the conceptual diagram in Figure 4-1 shows. Consequently, such
                                analyses can be out of sync with design information and lead to errors. With




c04.indd 94                                                                                                   12/19/07 1:57:05 PM
                                                                                                                4.1 Introduction: Why Owners Should Care About BIM            95

                                                                                                                                                            FIGURE 4-1
                                                    FEASIBILITY         DESIGN        CONSTRUCTION FACILITY          OPERATIONS          FACILITY           A) Traditional single-
                                                                                                   STARTUP                               RETROFIT
                                                                                                                                                            stage drawing-based
                                                                   Collaborative,                                                                           deliverables,
                                                                     BIM-based C                                                                            B) traditional facility




              Value of facility documentation*
                                                                         delivery
                                                                                                                                                            management database
                                                                         process
                                                                                                                                                            system, and C) BIM-
                                                                                                                                                            based deliverables
                                                                                                                                                            throughout the project
                                                  Loss of value                                                                                 G           delivery and operation
                                                      due to                                                                       E                        process.
                                                    handover,                                                    D
                                                  recreation of
                                                   information
                                                                                        Traditional
                                                                                      A Design-Bid-                  B
                                                                                         Build, paper-
                                                                                         based process

                                                                                                                                           F




                                                                       1–5 Years                                         20 plus years
                                                              Design and Construction                                    Operations
                                                                                           Facility Lifecycle
                                                                                                            D) Setup of facility management database
                                                 *slope of line communicates                                E) Integration of FM with back-office systems
                                                  effort to produce and maintain information                F) Use of 'as-built' drawings for retrofit
                                                                                                            G) Update of facility management database



              BIM-based processes, the owner can potentially realize a greater return on his
              or her investment as a result of the improved design process, which increases
              the value of project information in each phase and decreases the effort required
              to produce that information. Simultaneously, owners can reap dividends in
              project quality, cost, and future retrofits to the facility.
                   This chapter discusses how owners can use BIM to manage project risk,
              improve project quality, and deliver value to their businesses. It also shows
              how facility managers can use BIM to better manage their facilities. Owners
              here are the organizations that initiate and finance building projects. They
              make strategic decisions in the facility delivery process through the selection
              of service providers and the type of delivery processes they use. These deci-
              sions ultimately control the scope and effectiveness of BIM on a project.
                   This chapter begins with a discussion of BIM applications for all types of build-
              ing owners and facility managers. This is followed by a discussion of how these dif-
              ferent applications address issues for different types of owners: owner operators vs.
              owner developers; serial vs. one-time builders; private vs. government; and local
              vs. global. Section 4.4 discusses how different project delivery methods impact the
              implementation of various BIM applications. It shows why a collaborative delivery
              process is the best approach for successful application of BIM on a project.




c04.indd 95                                                                                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:05 PM
         96 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                     Section 4.5 provides a guide to BIM tools that are suitable or better ori-
                                ented for owners. Most of the BIM tools available today are targeted toward
                                service providers, such as architects, engineers, contractors, and fabricators;
                                they are not specifically targeted for owners. Other tools are discussed in
                                Chapters 5, 6, and 7, and references are provided for those sections. Section 4.6
                                discusses the owner’s building information model and how the owner’s per-
                                spective of it and the scope and level of detail may differ from those discussed
                                in subsequent chapters.
                                     Owners play a significant education and leadership role in the building
                                industry. Section 4.7 discusses different ways for owners to implement BIM
                                applications on their projects, including pre-qualification of service providers,
                                education and training seminars, contractual requirements, and changing their
                                internal processes. Section 4.8 follows with a discussion of the risks and
                                the process and technology barriers associated with BIM implementation. The
                                chapter concludes with guidelines for successful implementation.




                                     4.2 BIM APPLICATION AREAS FOR OWNERS

                                Traditionally, owners have not been agents of change within the building indus-
                                try. They have long been resigned to typical construction project problems,
                                such as cost overruns, schedule delays, and quality issues (Jackson 2002). Many
                                owners view construction as a relatively small capital expenditure compared to
                                the lifecycle costs or other operational costs that accrue over time. Changing
                                marketplace conditions, however, are forcing owners to rethink their views
                                and place greater emphasis on the building delivery process and its impact on
                                their business (Geertsema et al. 2003; Gaddie 2003).
                                     The firms that provide services to owners (AEC professionals) often point
                                to the short-sightedness of owners and the frequent owner requested changes
                                that ultimately impact design quality, construction cost, and time.
                                     Because of the considerable potential impact that BIM can have on these
                                problems, the owner is in the position to benefit most from its use. Thus, it
                                is critical that owners of all types understand how BIM applications can
                                enable competitive advantages and allow their organizations to better
                                respond to market demands and yield a better return on their capital invest-
                                ments. In those instances in which service providers are leading the BIM
                                implementation—seeking their own competitive advantage—educated
                                owners can better leverage the expertise and know-how of their design and
                                construction team.




c04.indd 96                                                                                                   12/19/07 1:57:06 PM
                                                                               4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners    97

                   In the following sections, we provide an overview of drivers that are moti-
              vating all types of owners to adopt BIM technologies, and we describe the
              different types of BIM applications available today. These drivers are:

                  • Cost reliability and management
                  • Time to market
                  • Increasing complexity in infrastructure and marketplace
                  • Sustainability
                  • Labor shortages
                  • Language barriers
                  • Asset management

                  Table 4-1 summarizes the BIM applications reviewed in this chapter from
              the owner’s perspective and the respective benefits associated with those appli-
              cations. Many of the applications referenced in this chapter are elaborated on
              in greater detail in Chapters 5, 6 and 7, and in the case studies in Chapter 9.


              4.2.1 Cost Reliability and Management
              Owners are often faced with cost overruns or unexpected costs that force them
              to either “value engineer,” go over budget, or cancel the project. Surveys of
              owners indicate that up to two-thirds of construction clients report cost over-
              runs (Construction Clients Forum 1997; FMI/CMAA 2005, 2006). To mitigate
              the risk of overruns and unreliable estimates, owners and service providers add
              contingencies to estimates or a “budget set aside to cope with uncertainties
              during construction” (Touran 2003). Figure 4-2 shows a typical range of
              contingencies that owners and their service providers apply to estimates, which
              vary from 50% to 5% depending on the project phase. Unreliable estimates
              expose owners to significant risk and artificially increase all project costs.
                   The reliability of cost estimates is impacted by a number of factors,
              including market conditions that change over time, the time between estimate
              and execution, design changes, and quality issues (Jackson 2002). The accu-
              rate and computable nature of building information models provides a more
              reliable source for owners to perform quantity take-off and estimating and
              provides faster cost feedback on design changes. This is important because the
              ability to influence cost is highest early in the process at the conceptual and
              feasibility phase, as shown in Figure 4-3. Estimators cite insufficient time, poor
              documentation, and communication breakdowns between project participants,
              specifically between owner and estimator, as the primary causes of poor
              estimates (Akintoye and Fitzgerald 2000).




c04.indd 97                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:57:06 PM
          Table 4-1 Summary of BIM application areas and potential benefits to all owners, owner-operators,
          and owner-developers; and a cross-reference to case studies presented in Chapter 9.
                                          Specific BIM
                                      application areas for
                                      Owner (referenced in                                 Benefits to all         Relevant case study
              Book section               this Chapter)            Market Driver              Owners                 (CS) or reference

              Chapter 5:              Space planning and      Cost management          Ensure project             Coast Guard Facility
              designers and           program compliance      marketplace complexity   requirements are met       Planning
              engineers                                                                                           Federal Courthouse

                                      Energy                  Sustainability           Improve sustainability     Federal Office
                                      (environmental)                                  and energy                 Building
                                      analysis                                         efficiencies

                                      Design configuration/   Cost management          Design quality             Coast Guard Facility
                                      scenario planning       complexity               communication              Planning

                                      Building system         Sustainability           Building performance       National Aquatics
                                      analysis/simulation                              and quality                Center

                                      Design communication/   Marketplace complexity   Communication              All case studies
                                      review                  and language barriers

              Chapters 5 and 6:       Quantity take-off and   Cost management          More reliable and          Hillwood Commercial
              designers, engineers,   cost estimation                                  accurate estimates           Project
              contractors                                                                                         Penn National Parking
                                                                                                                    Structure
                                                                                                                  100 11th Ave.
                                                                                                                  Apartments

                                      Design coordination     Cost management          Reduce field               Camino Medical
                                      (clash detection)       and infrastructure       errors and reduce          Building
                                                              complexity               construction costs

              Chapters 6 and 7:       Schedule simulation/    Time to market,          Communicate                One Island East Office
              contractors and         4D                      labor shortages, and     schedule visually          Tower
              fabricators                                     language barriers

                                      Project controls        Time to market           Track project activities   GM Flint project

                                      Pre-fabrication         Time to market           Reduce onsite labor        Camino Medical
                                                                                       and improve design         Building
                                                                                       quality                    100 11th Ave.
                                                                                                                  Apartments

              Chapter 4:              Pro forma analysis      Cost management          Improve cost reliability   Hillwood Commercial
              owners                                                                                              Project

                                      Operation simulation    Sustainability/Cost      Building performance
                                                              management               and maintainability

                                      Asset management        Asset management         Facility and asset         Coast Guard Facility
                                                                                       management                 Planning




c04.indd 98                                                                                                                              12/19/07 1:57:06 PM
                                                                                                                                                       4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners         99

                                                                                       Contingency/Reliability as a Function of                                                 FIGURE 4-2 Chart
                                                                                                  Project Phases                                                                showing the upper and
                                                                          60                                                                                                    lower limits that an
                                                                                                                                                                                owner typically adds




                                              % Reliability/Contingency
                                                                          50                                                                                                    to the contingency
                                                                                                                                                                                and reliability of
                                                                          40                                                                            Upper Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                an estimate over
                                                                                                                                                        Lower Limit
                                                                          30                                                                                                    different phases of a
                                                                                                                                                        BIM
                                                                                                                                                                                project (data adapted
                                                                          20                                                                                                    from United States
                                                                                                                                                                                1997; Munroe 2007;
                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                Oberlander and Trost
                                                                          0                                                                                                     2001) and the potential
                                                                                 Preliminary       Budget         Final Design     Actual                                       targeted reliability
                                                                                  Estimate        Estimate          Estimate                                                    improvements
                                                                                            Stage of Estimate Development                                                       associated with BIM-
                                                                                                                                                                                based estimating.



                                                                                                                                                                                FIGURE 4-3
                                                                           Ability to influence costs         Construction cost
              100%                                                                                                                                                              Influence of overall
                                                                                                                                                                         100%
                                                                                                                                                                                project cost over the
                                                 Conceptual                                                                                                                     project lifecycle.
                                              planning/feasibility
                                                   studies
                                                                                                                                                                                Today’s use of BIM is
                                                                                                                                                                                typically limited to the




                Level of Influence on Cost
                                                                                Design and engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                late phase of design
                                                                                                                                                                                and engineering or early
                                                                                                                                                                                phases of construction.
                                                                                              Procurement and construction                                                      Use of BIM earlier in
                                                                                                                                                                                design process will have
                                                                                                                                                                                greater influence on
                                                                                                                                   Startup
                                                                                                                                                                                cost. Improving overall
                                                                                                                                                Operation and                   cost reliability is a key
                                                                                                                                                maintenance                     motivator for employing
                                                                                                                                                                                BIM-based cost
                0%                                                                                                                                                        0%
                 Start                                                                             Project Time                                                                 estimating methods.
                                                                               More common applications of BIM with              Emerging uses of BIM with examples in
                                                                               examples in Chapter 9 Case Studies                Chapter 9 Case Studies



                                             Owners can manage cost with BIM applications to provide:

                  More reliable estimates early in the process with conceptual BIM
              estimating. Estimates that use conceptual building information models
              consisting of components with historical cost information, productivity infor-
              mation, and other estimating information can provide owners with quick
              feedback on various design scenarios. Accurate estimates can be very valuable
              early in the project, particularly for assessing a project’s predicted cash flow and
              procuring finance. The Hillwood Commercial project case study demonstrates
              how owners working with a service provider employing a conceptual BIM-based




c04.indd 99                                                                                                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:57:07 PM
         100 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                estimating tool called DProfiler are able to reduce overall contingency and reli-
                                ability and ultimately save money by borrowing less.
                                     Faster, better detailed, and more accurate estimates with BIM quantity
                                take- off tools. Both owners and estimators struggle with the ability to respond
                                to design and requirement changes and understand the impact of those changes
                                on the overall project budget and estimate. By linking the design model with
                                the estimating processes, the project team can speed up the quantity take-off
                                and overall estimating process and get faster feedback on proposed design
                                changes (see Chapters 5 and 6). For example, owners can automatically derive
                                accurate quantities and in turn streamline and verify estimates of designers and
                                subcontractors (Rundell 2006). The Hillwood Commercial project case study
                                cites evidence that estimating with BIM early in design can result in a 92% time
                                reduction to produce the estimate with only a 1% variance between the manual
                                and BIM-based processes. In the One Island East Office Tower case study, the
                                owner was able to set a lower contingency in their budget as a result of the reli-
                                ability and accuracy of the BIM-based estimate.
                                     Owners, however, must realize that BIM-based takeoff and estimating is
                                only a first step in the whole estimating process; it does not thoroughly
                                address the issue of omissions. Additionally, the more accurate derivation of
                                components that BIM provides does not deal with specific site conditions or
                                the complexity of the facility, which depend on the expertise of an estimator to
                                quantify.

                                4.2.2 Time to Market: Schedule Management
                                Time-to-market impacts all industries, and facility construction is often a
                                bottleneck. Manufacturing organizations have well-defined time to market
                                requirements, and companies like General Motors, as discussed in the GM
                                Flint case study, must explore methods and technologies that enable them to
                                deliver facilities faster, better, and cheaper. The GM Flint team completed the
                                project five weeks ahead of schedule by using innovative BIM processes, which
                                provide owners and their project teams with tools to automate design, simulate
                                operations, and employ offsite fabrication. These innovations—initially tar-
                                geted towards manufacturing or process facilities—are now available to the
                                general commercial facility industry and its service providers. The innovations
                                provide owners with a variety of BIM applications to respond to the following
                                time to market needs:
                                    Reduce time to market through the use of parametric models. Long
                                building cycles increase market risk. Projects that are financed in good economic
                                times may reach the market in a downturn, greatly impacting the project’s ROI
                                (Return on Investment). BIM processes, such as BIM-based design and pre-
                                fabrication, can greatly reduce the project duration, from project approval to




c04.indd 100                                                                                                   12/19/07 1:57:08 PM
                                                                                         4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners   101

               facility completion. The component parametric nature of the BIM model makes
               design changes easier and the resulting updates of documentation automatic.
               The Coast Guard Facility Planning case study is an excellent example of a para-
               metric-based design to support rapid scenario planning early in a project. This
               type of BIM application allows owners to better respond to market trends or
               business missions closer to construction and adjust project requirements in
               collaboration with the design team.
                    Reduce schedule duration with 3D coordination and prefabrication.
               All owners pay a cost for construction delays or lengthy projects, either in
               interest payments on loans, delayed rental income, or other income from sales
               of goods or products. In the Flint and Camino Medical Building case studies
               in Chapter 9, the application of BIM to support coordination and prefabrica-
               tion led to improved field productivity, reduced field effort, and reductions in
               the overall construction schedule, which resulted in on-time delivery for the
               owner.
                    Reduce schedule-related risk with BIM-based planning. Schedules are
               often impacted by activities involving high risk, dependencies, multiple organi-
               zations, or complex sequences of activities. These often occur in projects such
               as renovations of existing facilities, where construction must be coordinated
               with ongoing operations. For example, a construction manager representing
               the owner used 4D models (see Chapter 6 and Figure 4-4) to communicate a




               FIGURE 4-4 A) Views of a 4D model for a nine-floor hospital facility showing concurrent
               retrofit activities across departments and floors: a) 4D view of a department; b) 4D view
               of a floor; c) 4D view of all floors; d) activity type legend showing the types of activities the
               construction management team and owner communicated in the 4D model; e) the activities in
               progress; and f) the 4D hierarchy showing the organization by floor and department.
               Image provided courtesy of URS.




c04.indd 101                                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:57:08 PM
         102 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                schedule to hospital staff and mitigate the impact of activities on their opera-
                                tions (Roe 2002).
                                     Quickly respond to unforeseen field conditions with 4D -coordinated
                                BIM models. Owners and their service providers often encounter unforeseen
                                conditions that even the best digital models cannot foresee. Teams using digital
                                models are often in a better position to respond to unforeseen conditions and
                                get back on schedule. For example, a retail project was slated to open before
                                Thanksgiving for the holiday shopping season. Three months into the project,
                                unforeseen conditions forced the project to stop for three months. The con-
                                tractor used a 4D model (see Chapter 6) to help plan for the recovery and open
                                the facility on time (Roe 2002).

                                4.2.3 Complexity of Building Infrastructure
                                      and Building Environment
                                Modern buildings and facilities are complex in terms of the physical infrastruc-
                                ture and the organizational, financial, and legal structures used to deliver them.
                                Complicated building codes, statutory issues, and liability issues are now com-
                                mon in all building markets and are often a bottleneck or a significant hurdle
                                for project teams. Often, owners must coordinate the design and approval
                                efforts simultaneously. Meanwhile, facility infrastructures have grown increas-
                                ingly complex. Traditional MEP systems are being integrated with data/telecom,
                                building sensors or meters, and in some cases sophisticated manufacturing or
                                electrical equipment.
                                     BIM tools and processes can support owners’ efforts to coordinate the
                                increasingly complex building infrastructure and regulatory process by:
                                     Coordinating infrastructure through fully-integrated 3D models of MEP,
                                architectural, and structural systems. A building information model enables
                                virtual coordination of a building’s infrastructure across all disciplines. The
                                owner of a facility can include its own representatives from its maintenance
                                and operations staff to provide input and review of the model. Rework due to
                                design flaws can potentially be avoided. The GM Flint and Camino Medical
                                Building projects demonstrate how an owner can work with a construction
                                team to coordinate the MEP systems using digital 3D models.
                                     Producing higher quality and maintainable infrastructure through inter-
                                active review of coordinated models. Many owners need to go beyond typical
                                MEP coordination to ensure that the MEP, data/telecom, and equipment are
                                accessible and maintainable. This is particularly crucial for companies that
                                depend heavily on these systems, such as biotech and technology companies,
                                which demand reliable 24/7 service. Interactive review of the model allows
                                owners to virtually access and simulate maintenance procedures.




c04.indd 102                                                                                                   12/19/07 1:57:09 PM
                                                                              4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners   103

                    Conforming to codes and requirements through BIM-based automatic
               code-checking. Often, owners and their design teams must work with a variety
               of jurisdictions to ensure their facilities meet design, performance, and work-
               place safety codes. Regulatory personnel also face challenges for ensuring
               compliance and conformance during design and construction. A potential benefit
               of a building information model is the ability to automatically analyze and check
               the model for program and code compliance. In Singapore, the government and
               building industry have implemented an electronic approval process, called
               CORENET (CORENET 2007). The use of building models can break the review
               bottleneck by giving regulatory agencies better tools to analyze facility designs.
               BIM functions for anything beyond basic code-checking, however, still require
               research before they will become available for adoption by statutory agencies.
                    Preventing litigation through collaborative creation and sign- off of build-
               ing information models. Today, many projects invoke litigation to resolve
               payment issues due to changes. These issues include: designers citing owner-
               initiated changes; owners arguing that designers did not meet contractual
               requirements; and contractors arguing about scope of work and lack of infor-
               mation or inaccurate project documentation. Processes that center on a build-
               ing model can mitigate such situations simply due to the level of accuracy and
               resolution necessary for creating a model; the collaborative effort of creating
               the model often leads to better accountability amongst project participants.

               4.2.4 Sustainability
               The green building trend is leading many owners to consider the energy effi-
               ciency of their facilities and the overall environmental impact of their projects.
               Sustainable building is good business practice and can lead to greater marketa-
               bility of a facility. Building models provide several advantages over traditional
               2D models due to the richness of object information needed to perform energy
               or other environmental analyses. Specific BIM analysis tools are discussed in
               detail in Chapter 5. From the owner’s perspective, BIM processes can help:
                    Reduce energy consumption through energy analysis. On average,
               energy accounts for $1.50–$2.00 per square foot of operational costs (Hodges
               and Elvey 2005). For a 50,000 square foot facility, this amounts to $75–$100K
               annually. Investment in an energy-saving building system, such as enhanced
               insulation, reduces energy consumption by 10% and translates to $8–$10K
               annual savings. The break-even point for an up-front investment of $50K would
               occur by the 6th year of operation. The challenge when making such assess-
               ments is to compute the actual reduction in energy consumption achievable by
               any specific design. There are many tools for owners to evaluate the payoff and
               return on energy-saving investments, including life-cycle analysis, and these




c04.indd 103                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:57:09 PM
         104 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                are discussed in Chapter 5. While these analysis tools do not absolutely require
                                the use of a building information model for input, a model greatly facilitates
                                their use. The Federal Office Building case study demonstrates the kinds of
                                energy conservation analyses that can be integrated using BIM tools.
                                     Improve operational productivity with model creation and simulation
                                tools. Sustainable design can greatly impact overall workplace productivity.
                                92% of operating costs are spent on the people who work in the facility (Romm
                                1994). Studies suggest that day-lighting in retail and offices improves produc-
                                tivity and reduces absenteeism (Roodman and Lenssen 1995). BIM technolo-
                                gies provide owners with tools needed for assessing the appropriate trade-offs
                                when considering the use of daylighting and the mitigation of glare and solar
                                heat gain, as compare with project cost and overall project requirements. The
                                Federal Office Building case study compared different scenarios to maximize
                                the potential benefits of daylighting.

                                4.2.5 Overcoming Labor Shortage, Education, and
                                      Language Barriers
                                Owners face global and local market issues. All projects must meet local
                                approval and typically rely on local resources to perform onsite activities. Even
                                on local projects, it is common for multiple languages to be spoken. Many
                                projects integrate global resources, particularly for international work; and
                                many industrialized countries are experiencing a growing shortage of skilled
                                workers and an aging workforce in the construction and facility industry
                                (McNair and Flynn 2006). BIM-based delivery of a project can potentially miti-
                                gate the impact of these trends by:
                                     Maximizing labor efficiency through BIM design linked with pre-
                                fabrication and field planning. Combined with management approaches like
                                lean construction, BIM can help project teams improve labor productivity and
                                decrease field labor demands. The Camino Group Medical Building case study
                                is an excellent example of using a 3D information model to support both pre-
                                fabrication and optimization of field activities through virtual coordination
                                and planning, reducing demands on field labor. In fact, because lean construc-
                                tion requires process changes that transcend the boundaries of individual com-
                                panies in construction projects, the most successful applications have been
                                those promoted by owners, such as Sutter Health, the HMO behind the Camino
                                Medical Building. BIM has a central role to play in facilitating the application
                                of lean techniques, such as pull flow control of labor and material flows.
                                     Overcoming language barriers through BIM simulation and communi-
                                cation. Domestically and abroad, most projects involve personnel who
                                speak multiple languages or dialects in the office and field. Efforts that embed




c04.indd 104                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:10 PM
                                                                           4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners   105

               translation tools into CAD or even BIM fall short due to the jargon and trade-
               specific information commonly notated on drawings. BIM can be used to
               communicate daily field activities to foreign field workers (Sawyer 2006). This
               interactive Game Boy-like view provides workers with a highly interactive way
               to navigate and query project information.
                    Educating the project team through interactive BIM reviews. Projects
               often continue over long periods and involve numerous service providers.
               Project teams must continually educate new project participants during each
               phase of the project. The computable nature of the 3D building information
               models makes them an excellent tool for quickly bringing new team members
               up to speed, so they can understand the scope, requirements, and status of a
               project. This communication is vital, particularly as a project ramps up or new
               participants join the team. The fourth author participated on a project where
               the owner (Disney) used 3D, 4D, and simulated operation models to educate
               over 400 interested parties, ranging from local agencies and executives to pro-
               spective bidders and new employees (Schwegler et al. 2000). The rich interac-
               tive nature of the information greatly enhanced understanding of the project.
               Unlike today’s 2D disparate project documentation or even 3D models, the
               BIM design and review tools provide highly interactive features that not only


                                                                                                  FIGURE 4-5
                                                                                                  A screenshot showing
                                                                                                  the spatial analysis
                                                                                                  information in a
                                                                                                  schedule and in the
                                                                                                  shaded 2D view.
                                                                                                  Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                  of Autodesk.




c04.indd 105                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:57:10 PM
         106 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                    allow you to view the project but query the model and probe a variety of infor-
                                    mation about the project’s components.

                                    4.2.6 Design Assessment
                                    Owners must be able to manage and evaluate the scope of the design against
                                    their own requirements at every phase of a project. During conceptual design,
                                    this often involves spatial analysis. Later on, this involves analyses for evaluat-
                                    ing whether the design will meet its functional needs. Today, this is a manual
                                    process, and owners rely on designers to walkthrough the project with draw-
                                    ings, images, or rendered animations. Requirements often change, however,
                                    and even with clear requirements, it can be difficult for an owner to ensure that
                                    all requirements have been met.
                                         Additionally, an ever increasing proportion of projects involve either the
                                    retrofit of existing facilities or building in an urban setting. These projects
                                    often impact the surrounding community or users of the current facility.
                                    Seeking input from all project stakeholders is difficult when they cannot ade-
                                    quately interpret and understand the project drawings and schedule. Owners
                                    can work with their design team to use a building information model to:
                                         Improve program compliance through BIM spatial analyses. Owners
                                    such as the United States Coast Guard are able to do rapid spatial analyses
                                    with BIM authoring tools (See Coast Guard Facility Planning case study).
                                    Figure 4-5 shows how a building model can communicate in real-time both
                                    spatially and in data form, to check compliance with requirements. Different



          FIGURE 4-6
          Snapshots showing
          the owner (GSA)
          and judges in a
          Virtual Reality Cave
          environment while
          interactively reviewing
          the design.
          Image provided
          courtesy of Walt Disney
          Imagineering.




c04.indd 106                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:11 PM
                                                                             4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners   107

                                                                                                    FIGURE 4-7
                                                                                                    Example of BIM space
                                                                                                    modeling by Jacobs
                                                                                                    Facilities, where
                                                                                                    they used spatial
                                                                                                    information to check
                                                                                                    the design against
                                                                                                    program requirements
                                                                                                    and to evaluate such
                                                                                                    things as natural
                                                                                                    lighting and energy
                                                                                                    efficiencies during
                                                                                                    the conceptual design
                                                                                                    process.
                                                                                                    Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                    of Jacobs.




               colors are automatically assigned to rooms based on their dimensions and
               function. In some cases, the color-coding can alert designers or owners of
               rooms that exceed or don’t meet existing requirements. This visual feedback is
               invaluable during conceptual and schematic design. Thus, the owner can better
               ensure that the requirements of their organization are met and that operational
               efficiencies of the program are realized.
                    Receive more valuable input from project stakeholders through visual
               simulation. Owners often need adequate feedback from project stakeholders,
               who either have little time or struggle with understanding the information pro-
               vided about a project. Figure 4-6 is a snapshot of judges reviewing their planned
               courtroom. Figure 4-4 shows a 4D snapshot of all floors of a hospital to com-
               municate the sequence of construction for each department and get feedback
               on how it will impact hospital operations. In both projects, the building infor-
               mation model and rapid comparison of scenarios greatly enhanced the review
               process. The traditional use of real-time and highly-rendered walkthrough
               technologies are one-time events, whereas the BIM and 4D tools make what-if
               design explorations far easier and more viable economically.
                    Rapidly reconfigure and explore design scenarios. Real-time configura-
               tion, however, is possible either in the model generation tool or a specialized
               configuration tool. Figure 4-7 shows an example from the Jacobs Facilities
               project, where BIM was used to quickly evaluate scenarios and to analyze
               requirements, needs, budget, and owner feedback (McDuffie 2007). Figure 4-8




c04.indd 107                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:57:12 PM
         108 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

          FIGURE 4-8
          (A) A tool for quickly
          exploring retail space
          design and cost from
          (B) a set of retail
          shapes. (C) A rendering
          of a retail store for
          a specific design
          scenario.
          Images provided
          courtesy of Screampoint.




                                     shows a store configuration tool that allows a retail owner to quickly configure,
                                     visualize, and price different layouts for a retail space. These objects have rules
                                     and behaviors that constrain placement based on clearances and adjacen-
                                     cies and allow design teams to quickly layout a room and virtually walk around it.
                                          Simulate facility operations. Owners may need additional types of simula-
                                     tions to assess the design quality beyond walkthroughs or visual simulations.
                                     These may include crowd behavior or emergency evacuation scenarios.
                                     Figure 4-9 shows an example crowd simulation for a typical day at a metro
                                     station with related analysis. The simulations used the building information
                                     model as a starting point for generating these scenarios. Such simulations are
                                     labor intensive and involve the use of specialized tools and services. For facili-
                                     ties where such performance requirements are critical, however, the initial
                                     investment in a building information model can pay off due to the more accu-
                                     rate 3D input that these specialized tools require.


                                     4.2.7 Facility and Information Asset Management
                                     Every industry is now faced with understanding how to leverage information
                                     as an asset; and facility owners are no exception. Today, information is generated




c04.indd 108                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:57:14 PM
                                                                                         4.2 BIM Application Areas for Owners   109




               FIGURE 4-9 Examples of Legion Studio’s visual and analytical outputs based on 2D and 3D
               building information data.
               The main 3D rendering shows a simulation of a metro station during a weekday morning peak.
               (A) A map of an airport uses color to show average speed, with red indicating slow movement and
               blue indicating free-flowing movement;
               (B) a map of a stadium with access routes and adjacent retail facilities showing mean density,
               with red and yellow indicating the locations of highest density; and (C) a graph comparing
               passenger interchange times between several origin-destination pairs. (See color insert for full
               color figure.) Images provided courtesy of Legion Limited.



               during each project phase and often re-entered or produced during hand-offs
               between phases and organizations, as shown in Figure 4-1. At the end of most
               projects, the value of this information drops precipitously, because it is typi-
               cally not updated to reflect as-built conditions or in a form that is readily acces-
               sible or manageable. Figure 4-1 shows that a project involving collaborative
               creation and updating of a building model potentially will see fewer periods of
               duplicate information entry or information loss. Owners who view the total
               lifecycle ownership of their projects can use a building model strategically and
               effectively to:
                    Quickly populate a facility management database. In the Coast Guard
               Facility Planning case study, the team realized a 98% time savings by using
               building information models to populate and edit the facility management
               database. These savings are attributed to a reduction in labor needed to enter
               the spatial information.




c04.indd 109                                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:57:14 PM
         110 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

          FIGURE 4-10
          The United State Coast
          Guard Web-based
          facility asset and
          portfolio system.
          Image provided
          courtesy of Onuma and
          Associates, Inc.




                                       Manage facility assets with BIM asset management tools. The United
                                   States Coast Guard is integrating BIM into its portfolio and asset management,
                                   as discussed in Coast Guard Facility Planning case study. Figure 4-10 shows
                                   several views of their Web-based asset management tool, which integrates GIS
                                   data and building models for various facilities. Building components and
                                   assemblies are associated with facility information and used to support critical
                                   analyses, such as mission readiness. Another example is a 4D financial model
                                   shown in Figure 4-11 that associates each building object or objects with a




                                   FIGURE 4-11 A 4D financial model showing how the “assessed” condition of facilities, ranging
                                   from good (green) to fair to poor (red)as indicated by different colors, changes over time.
                                   (See color insert for full color figure.) Image provided courtesy of PBS&J, Common Point, Inc., AEC
                                   Infosystems, Inc., and MACTEC, Inc.




c04.indd 110                                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:57:16 PM
                                                      4.3 Types of Owners: Why, How Often, and Where They Build   111

               condition assessment over time. The owner can view the facility or facilities
               periodically to get a “big picture” view of its condition assessment.
                    Rapidly evaluate the impact of retrofit or maintenance work on the
               facility. Another example is the use of visual and intelligent models to help
               facility managers assess the impact of retrofit or maintenance work. For
               example, a BIM - based FM system was applied during maintenance work on
               the Sydney Opera House (Mitchell and Schevers 2005). The maintenance
               team used the model to visually assess which areas would be affected when
               power was cut to a specific room.



                    4.3 TYPES OF OWNERS: WHY, HOW OFTEN,
                        AND WHERE THEY BUILD

               The many varied BIM applications discussed in the previous sections highlight
               the broad set of uses and benefits that BIM technologies offer. For many own-
               ers, these benefits must directly tie in to their business models. The following
               sections discuss the high-level and key differences between owner types and
               how different BIM applications support their specific needs.


               4.3.1 The BIM Business Case
               When initiating a project, every owner considers the overall economics of
               building a facility. Thus, the decision to apply BIM technology is often sup-
               ported by an economic justification, either in terms of decreasing first or recur-
               ring costs or potential gains in income. Table 4-2 summarizes the typical costs
               and prospective income for a facility by category. To justify a BIM application,
               it must either decrease the first or recurring costs or increase income. Recurring
               costs can exceed first costs by as much as 2:1(Dolan 2006). Thus, when con-
               sidering a BIM application, owners should not simply look at its impact on first
               costs but on recurring costs. In the following sections, we consider how differ-
               ent owners and delivery processes factor into this analysis.


               4.3.2 Operating Owners vs. Developer Owners
               Owners who build to operate have a strong incentive to consider long-term
               costs of owning and operating a facility. Examples of owners who build to
               occupy include corporations, retail, healthcare facilities, schools and univer-
               sities, sports and recreation facilities, and the federal government. In the U.S.
               this type of building comprises nearly 50% of total construction and totaled
               $350 billion in 2006, with general commercial and educational comprising




c04.indd 111                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:57:18 PM
          Table 4-2 Summary of typical costs and income for a facility and factors that increase or decrease the
          cost/income and the type of BIM application that can positively impact the costs/income.
                                                                                          Factors that
                                       Expense or Income                               increase/decrease
                                           Category             Description              cost (relative)       BIM Application

               First costs            Land acquisition     Cost to purchase land     Economy and market      None
               (all owners)                                or existing facility      demand

                                      Design               Services related to       Scope (extent of        Program compliance
                                                           designing the building    requirements)           and automated-
                                                           to meet owner                                     drawing production
                                                           requirements
                                                                                     Level of information    Coordination
                                                                                     development, and
                                                                                     complexity
                                                                                     Regulatory              Code-checking
                                                                                     compliance

                                      Construction         Services related to       Labor market            Prefabrication and 4D
                                                           physically constructing   Material costs and      Prefabrication and
                                                           the facility based on     accurate quantities     coordinated design
                                                           design documentation
                                                                                     Rework due to           Clash detection and
                                                                                     errors and quality of   coordination
                                                                                     construction
                                                                                     Site constraints        4D
                                                                                     Complexity              Coordination and 4D

                                      Project management   Costs associated with     Coordination costs
                                                           managing the project      and number of
                                                                                     organizations

                                      Furnishings          Furniture, fixtures,      Configuration,          Design configuration
                                                           and equipment             availability, and
                                                                                     coordination

               Recurring costs        Carrying charges     Interest on financing     Project duration        4D and prefabrication
               (primarily operating                                                  Over-estimating the     Takeoff conceptual
               owners)                                                               project                 estimating

                                      Insurance            Costs associated with     Operational risks       Operation simulation
                                                           insuring facility

                                      Replacement          Costs associated with     Selecting low-end and   Asset management
                                                           replacing furnishings,    poorly performing       and analysis
                                                           finishes (carpets and     materials
                                                           paints), equipment,
                                                           including roofs
                                                           or other building
                                                           components

                                                                                                                         (Continued)




c04.indd 112                                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:18 PM
                                                     4.3 Types of Owners: Why, How Often, and Where They Build                    113

                                                                                         Factors that
                                     Expense or Income                                increase/decrease
                                         Category             Description               cost (relative)           BIM Application

                                    Maintenance          Costs associated with      Poor design and             Operation simulation
                                                         maintaining the facility   construction and the
                                                         including landscape        maintainability of the
                                                         and grounds                design

                                    Operations and       Energy and voice data      Energy efficiency and       Energy analysis
                                    utilities                                       building performance        and performance
                                                                                                                monitoring

                                    Personnel            Salary and benefits        Poorly functioning          Energy analysis and
                                                         for non-operation staff    space or non-ideal          scenario design
                                                                                    work environment

                Income              Sale/lease           Income from selling or     Time to sale/market         4D, prefabrication,
                                                         renting a property                                     and coordination
                                                                                    Marketability of facility   Design configuration
                                                                                                                Operation
                                                                                                                simulation (pre-sales
                                                                                                                visualization)
                                                                                                                Energy analysis
                                                                                    Market demand and           None
                                                                                    the economy

                                    Production           Goods manufactured         Time to market              4D, prefabrication,
                                                         or sold in a facility                                  and coordination
                                                         (retail)

                                    Services             Income from services       Workplace productivity      Energy and lighting
                                                         performed in facility      of services                 analysis, operation
                                                                                                                simulation

                                    Indirect             Reduction in               Sustainability              Energy analysis and
                                                         operational costs                                      design options


               the largest portion of this market (Tulacz 2006). The case studies at the end
               of this book demonstrate various BIM applications and benefits for the fol-
               lowing types of operating owners:

                   • Healthcare (Camino Group Medical Building)
                   • Federal facilities (Federal Courthouse, Federal Office Building, and
                     Coast Guard Facility Planning)
                   • General commercial space (One Island East Office Tower and Hillwood
                     Commercial Project)
                   • Manufacturing (General Motors Production Plant)




c04.indd 113                                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:57:19 PM
         114 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                     These types of owners—owners who operate—benefit from any of the
                                BIM applications areas listed in Table 4-2 that are associated with first and
                                recurring costs.
                                     Owner developers, on the other hand, build to sell and are motivated to
                                maximize their rate of return on their investment in the land and the facility.
                                Developers who sell have a shorter ownership lifecycle compared to the owner
                                who operates. Owners who sell are typically real estate developers or multi or
                                single family home builders. * Their financial models are primarily driven by
                                the cost of the land and permitting and the risks associated with market down-
                                turns and changing market trends. The changes in construction cost have less
                                impact than these factors in their business models. The indirect costs that stem
                                from design and construction services can impact their business models in the
                                following ways:

                                    1. Unreliable or poor estimates result in higher (than necessary) carrying
                                       costs.
                                    2. Lengthy permitting phases result in higher carrying costs and missed
                                       market opportunitites.
                                    3. Rework and poor planning increase schedule duration and increase car-
                                       rying costs, time to market/sale
                                    4. Design commitments early in a length design a and schedule process reduce
                                       opportunities to respond to market changes and to maximize sale price.

                                    Owner developers can avoid these hidden costs and increase ROI by apply-
                                ing BIM on their project to improve estimate reliability (e.g., conceptual esti-
                                mating), better communicate project to the community, reduce time to market,
                                and improve marketability of the project.

                                4.3.3 When Owners Build: One-Time or Serial
                                Another factor related to the owner’s business model is how often they build.
                                Owners that build once are initially less likely to invest in process changes
                                either due to lack of time for research and education or perceived value to
                                invest in change. Whereas owners building serially, such as universities, devel-
                                opers, or retail owners, often recognize the inefficiencies in current delivery
                                methods and their impact on overall project cost. These repeat builders are more
                                likely to consider building delivery processes that are not based on minimizing

                                *The scope of this discussion does not address the unique demands of the home builder market and
                                its own network of service providers. While many of the benefits we cite certainly apply to home
                                builders, the technologies and tools we discuss in this book focus on commercial construction.




c04.indd 114                                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:57:19 PM
                                                                                              4.4 How Owners Build   115

               initial first-costs to delivery models that optimize the overall building delivery
               and yield quality facilities based on reliable costs and schedules. Consequently,
               serial owners tend to represent a high proportion of early BIM adopters.
                    One-time owners, though, can benefit just as much as serial owners and
               can do so easily by collaborating with design and construction providers famil-
               iar with BIM processes. Many of the case studies discuss projects where a serv-
               ice provider initiated the use of BIM.



                    4.4 HOW OWNERS BUILD

               There are a number of procurement methods available to owners and the type
               of method chosen will impact the owner’s ability to manage the BIM process
               and realize its benefits. The most important differentiator between owners is
               the degree to which they participate in the design and construction or facility
               development process. For example, owners who employ project management
               staff, including architects and planners, will use BIM within their own organi-
               zations. Owners who employ service-providers will either instruct others to
               use BIM through contractual imperatives or rely on service providers that
               choose to use BIM. These methods often depend on how the owner procures
               the project. Although there are numerous ways to procure a project, the three
               main facility delivery processes are: single stage or traditional (design-bid-
               build), design-build, and collaborative. The following sections discuss these
               three different delivery processes and how they impact the potential use of
               BIM on a project.

               4.4.1 Design-Bid-Build
               In the U.S., 60% of facility design and construction is still performed under the
               design-bid-build process (American Institute of Architects 2006). As described
               in Chapter 1, the single stage or traditional method involves an owner main-
               taining contractual relationships with the designer and builder and managing
               the relationship and flow of information between the two groups, as shown in
               Figures 4-12 and 4-13. The architect and builder manage the relationships and
               information flow between their sub-consultants and subcontractors. This con-
               tractual divide results in a sequential process with specific deliverables at spec-
               ified time periods, creating an information barrier between organizations and
               often prohibiting the electronic exchange of timely project information. In
               some cases, the owner hires a construction manager, either external or internal,
               to oversee and manage communication within the design and construction
               organizations. This process does not lend itself well to supporting the adoption




c04.indd 115                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:57:20 PM
         116 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

          FIGURE 4-12                                                    Typical Organization of Project Team
          The traditional                                                      (Single stage, traditional)
          organization of a
          project team involves                                                                                                                Lines represent typical contract
                                                                                       Owner/Client
          contracts between the                                                                                                                          relationship
          owner and the primary
          architect and builder,
          who in turn maintain
                                                                                                                                                    Relationships needed
          contracts between                                          Architect                        General Contractor
                                                                                                                                                    to build an integrated
          these organizations                                                                                                                       building model or use
          and sub-consultants.                                                                                                                           BIM process
          This type of contracting
          often prevents the           Engineers and other
                                                                                      Subcontractors                            Fabricators
          flow of information,              designers
          responsibility, and
          ultimately the ability to
          effectively use BIM tools                                                                     Building Product
          and processes.                                                                                    Suppliers




                                                                                                          PROJECT TIMELINE


                                       (A) Design-Bid-     Feasability
                                                                                               Design                                               Build
                                                                                Concept Development     Documentation                 Pre-Construction   Construction


                                            Build
                                                                          Bid                                               Bid                                         Operate



                                                                                               Design
                                       (B) Design-         Feasability
                                                                                Concept Development     Documentation
                                                                                                                                                  Operate

                                                                                                                        Build
                                          Build
                                                                          Bid
                                                                                                         Pre-Construction   Construction




                                       (C) Collaborative
                                                                                                      Design
                                                                  Feasability                                                                    Operate
                                                                                  Concept Development           Documentation

                                                                          Bid                         Construction
                                                                                             Pre-Construction                   Construction



                                                                                                                                                time savings due to
                                                                                                                                                parallel design and
                                                                                                                                                   construction


                                      FIGURE 4-13 Diagram comparing three different delivery processes.
                                      A) The traditional single-stage involves the completion of each phase prior to the start of the
                                      next phase, often involving a different organization performing each phase in a non-integrative
                                      process; B) the design-build process involves an overlap of development phases leading to a
                                      shortened overall schedule and requires integration between designers and builders;
                                      c) a collaborative process involves participation by all key participants as early in the process as
                                      possible and ongoing collaboration.




c04.indd 116                                                                                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:57:20 PM
                                                                                            4.4 How Owners Build   117

               of technologies or processes across the project team, due to the many contractual
               divides. Typically, this process is defined by the “wall” of deliverables whereby
               at the end of each phase the deliverables are handed “over the wall” with little
               or no integration or collaboration between the participants in each phase. The
               deliverables are typically paper-based. Often at the start of each phase, infor-
               mation is re-created or duplicated, reducing the value of project documenta-
               tion and resulting in a loss of project knowledge (See Figure 4-1). Contractors
               or their subcontractors and fabricators often re-draw architect’s construction
               documentation in the form of configuration drawings, because the architec-
               tural and engineering drawings do not dimension or lay out spaces or detail the
               connections needed for subcontractor coordination.
                    This deliverable-based approach makes it difficult to successfully imple-
               ment those BIM tools and processes that require a model-based handover
               between organizations; in these scenarios, the organizations agree a priori on
               the format and content of the model itself. For this reason, BIM application in
               a DBB project is often limited to single phase BIM applications, such as 4D or
               energy analysis. An owner, however, can expand the potential BIM application
               on DBB projects to include:

                   1) Contractual requirements specifying the format and scope of the build-
                      ing model and other information at each deliverable phase
                   2) The cooperation of individual organizations to support or promote the
                      BIM process within their own phase



               4.4.2 Design-Build
               As discussed in Chapter 1, an increasingly common model of facility delivery
               is design-build (DB), where a contractual relationship is established between
               the owner and a single organization and often represents the architect and
               builder either as a single company or as a partnership. In design-build, the
               individual phases are not necessarily shortened, but the overlap of phases
               reduces the overall project duration, as shown in Figure 4-13(B). In some cases,
               the integration of construction details earlier in the process can inform the
               design and lead to improved coordination and constructability and reduced
               construction time.
                   Studies comparing these approaches conclude that the DB process does
               have benefits in terms of project timeliness and schedule reliability (Debella
               and Ries 2006; Konchar and Sanvido 1998; USDOT - Federal Highway
               Administration 2006; Ibbs et al. 2003). The Konchar and Sanvido study found
               benefits of DB in terms of cost and quality, but other studies do not show
               significant cost or quality differences between the two approaches. The DB




c04.indd 117                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:57:21 PM
         118 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                delivery process creates a potentially smoother flow of information between
                                design and construction organizations. It still requires that organizations (or
                                groups) spend time at the beginning of the project to define the work process,
                                build and maintain the building model, outline its specific uses including scope
                                and responsibility of each participating organization, and test the process.
                                Unlike the DBB method, where such collaboration is often limited to specific
                                handover periods or deliverables, the DB team can collaboratively identify BIM
                                applications across project phases and focus less on specific deliverables
                                between organizations and more on overall deliverables to the owner.
                                Section 4.9 provides some guidelines and tips for owners wanting to promote
                                a successful BIM effort.

                                4.4.3 Collaborative Process
                                A third and new approach to procuring a project is a variant of the design-
                                build, has yet to be named, and emphasizes a collaborative, alliance-based
                                relationship between owner and AEC service providers. A study by the
                                University of Texas (Geertsema et al. 2003) documents a significant shift in
                                non-collaborative and collaborative relationships between owner and contrac-
                                tors from “winning bid first use” to “alliance preferred provider.” That is,
                                owners are moving away from the traditional selection of providers based on
                                ‘low-bid,’ which is common in DBB scenarios, to preferred providers. The
                                same study notes that the projects with collaborative relationships are more
                                successful from both the owner and contractor’s perspectives.
                                     This collaborative approach involves the selection and participation of all
                                key project participants as early in the process as possible, either with single
                                prime (representing multiple organizations) or multiple prime contractual rela-
                                tionships. Figure 4-13(C) shows how this process may occur during the
                                feasibility stage, when the participation of service providers potentially has
                                the greatest impact and can help define project requirements. Where the design-
                                build process typically involves a partial overlap of designers and builders, the
                                collaborative process requires overlap beginning with the project’s initial phase
                                and by more participants, requiring more intimate involvement of the owner or
                                owner’s representative. The collaborative process may not necessarily yield a
                                shorter overall project duration or earlier start of construction, as shown in
                                Figure 4-13, but it does achieve participation of the construction team, includ-
                                ing fabricators and suppliers who are involved early and often. This approach
                                is often combined with incentives for the entire project team to meet specific
                                project goals and targets and also involves risk sharing. The primary difference
                                between this process and the design-build approach is the collective sharing of
                                risk, incentives, and the method of creation of facility documentation.




c04.indd 118                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:21 PM
                                                                                            4.4 How Owners Build   119

                    The collaborative approach is an ideal procurement and delivery method
               for reaping the benefits of BIM applications on a project. The participation of
               all project participants in the creation, revision, and updating of the building
               information model forces participants to work together and virtually build the
               project.
                    The technical challenges discussed in the previous section will persist, and
               owners along with the entire project team should follow the guidelines in
               Section 4.9 to maximize the team’s effort.

               4.4.4 Internal or External Modeling
               These different procurement methods do not address situations where own-
               ers perform some or all of the design, engineering, or construction services.
               Outsourcing is a common trend for many owners (Geertsema et al. 2003).
               There are some owner organizations that have construction management and
               construction superintendents on staff. In such cases, as discussed in
               Section 4.9, the owner must first assess their internal capabilities and work
               processes. The “wall” of deliverables can exist internally, and defining model
               handover requirements between internal groups is just as critical. The owner
               must ensure that all participants, internal or external, can contribute to
               the creation, modification, and review of the building model. This may
               involve the owner requiring the use of specific software or data formats to
               exchange data.
                    Outsourcing, however, does have an impact on the overall BIM effort, and
               owners who choose to hire a third party to produce the building information
               model independent of the project’s internal and external team of service pro-
               viders should carefully consider full outsourcing of the model. Typically, the
               outsourcing effort leads to a building information model that is under-utilized,
               outdated, and of poor quality. This occurs for several reasons. First, the
               internal or external team has to reach a specified point in the project to hand
               over the traditional documentation. Second, the outsource team must spend
               significant time, often with little contact since the team is now busy working
               towards the next deliverable, to understand and model the project. Finally, the
               outsource team does not typically have highly-skilled or experienced staff with
               building knowledge. Thus, outsourcing should be done with considerable
               attention and management oversight or used as an effort to support the BIM
               effort, not replace it. The One Island East Office Tower case study is an
               excellent example of working with external resources to develop the building
               model while integrating its resources into the project team both physically and
               virtually. Another example is the Letterman Digital Arts project in San
               Francisco, where the owner hired an outside firm to build and maintain the




c04.indd 119                                                                                                       12/19/07 1:57:22 PM
         120 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                building model (Sullivan 2007). In both cases, the critical success factor was
                                attributed to bringing the resources onsite and mandating participation by all
                                project participants.



                                     4.5 BIM TOOL GUIDE FOR OWNERS

                                In the previous sections, we reference several BIM technologies that owners
                                and their service providers are employing. In this section, we provide an over-
                                view of BIM tools or features of those tools intended to fulfill owners’ needs
                                and other owner-specific BIM applications. Chapters 5–7 discuss the specific
                                BIM design and construction technologies, such as model generation tools,
                                energy analysis, 4D, and design coordination.

                                4.5.1 BIM Estimating Tools
                                Owners use estimates to baseline their project cost and perform financial
                                forecasting or pro forma analyses. Often, these estimates are created using
                                square foot or unit cost methods, by an owner representative or estimating con-
                                sultant. Some estimating software packages, such as U.S. Cost Success Estimator
                                (U.S. Cost 2007), are designed specifically for owners. Microsoft© Excel, how-
                                ever, is the software most commonly used for estimating. In 2007, U.S. Cost
                                provided their customers with functionality to extract quantity takeoff informa-
                                tion from a building model created in Autodesk Revit®. Another product
                                targeted to owners is Exactal’s CostX® product (Exactal 2007), which imports
                                building models and allows users to perform automatic and manual takeoffs.
                                Chapter 6 provides a more detailed overview of BIM-based estimating. Owners
                                should evaluate and consider the following features of such applications:

                                    • Level of estimating detail. Most owners rely on unit-cost or square
                                      footage estimating methods, using values for specific facility types.
                                      Some estimating tools are designed for this basic estimating. Others
                                      use “assemblies” or estimating items that include detailed line-item
                                      costs. Owners need to make sure that the estimating tool extracts
                                      BIM component information at the level of detail required: quantities,
                                      per component, or square footage.
                                    • Organization formats. Most owners will organize their estimate into a
                                      Work Breakdown Structure (WBS). In the U.S., most owners use either
                                      MasterFormat or Uniformat WBS. For example, the GSA is working
                                      with the Construction Specification Institute (CSI) to expand this format
                                      and requires estimating tools that support extensions to these formats.




c04.indd 120                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:57:22 PM
                                                                                    4.5 BIM Tool Guide for Owners   121

                   • Integration with custom cost/component databases. BIM-based esti-
                     mating often requires establishing links between BIM components and
                     estimating items and assemblies via a specific component attribute or
                     through a visual interface. This may require significant setup and stand-
                     ardization.
                   • Manual intervention. The ability to manually modify, adjust, or enter
                     quantity take-off information is critical.
                   • Model aggregation support. The ability to import multiple models and
                     combine take-off and estimate information from different models. Tools
                     like U.S. Cost allow owners to aggregate and re-use estimating items
                     across projects. With BIM-based estimating, an owner may need to
                     perform the quantity take-off from multiple models, multiple facilities,
                     or multiple domain models, i.e., architectural, structural, etc.
                   • Versioning and comparison. One of the most important potential fea-
                     tures of a BIM quantity take-off and estimating tool is the ability to com-
                     pare versions and track the differences between any two or more design
                     scenarios or versions. For example, Exactal CostX® provides a visual
                     comparison between two versions of a design to show where changes
                     have been made and their impact on quantity take-off information. This
                     feature is potentially invaluable for owners seeking to understand the
                     cost impact of design changes.
                   • Reporting features. Most estimating tools provide reporting features to
                     print hard copy reports of the take-off and estimate. Some estimating
                     software tools provide a viewer, as shown in Figure 4-14, to enable an
                     owner to interactively view the cost information and review it in 2D,
                     3D, or spreadsheet format.


               4.5.2 Model Validation, Program, and Code Compliance
               An emerging group of BIM software tools is called model checkers. These
               tools are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5, as many of the features are
               related to services provided by the designer. From the owner or construction
               manager’s perspectives, these tools perform a variety of important
               functions:
                   Check against program requirements. This type of feature compares
               owner requirements with the current design (See Chapter 5 for further
               discussion of these tools). These may include spatial, energy, and distance and
               height requirements for specific spaces or between spaces as well as adja-
               cency requirements. Owners may have their own staff do these checks, or
               they may require that the design team or a 3rd party do them.




c04.indd 121                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:22 PM
         122 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

          FIGURE 4-14
          Screenshot of the
          Exactal CostX® Viewer
          that (a) allows owners
          to view the project in
          2D or 3D along with
          its related cost items
          and (b) view detailed
          information for the
          cost estimate.




                                        Validate building information model. Today, owners are able to quickly
                                   and thoroughly assess the quality of a building information model or, if an
                                   owner requires specific types of information input, determine whether that
                                   information exists and is in the specified format. Tools such as Solibri
                                   Model Checker™ (Solibri 2007) (Figure 4-15) provide both types of valida-
                                   tion. At a generic level of validation, the owner can test for duplicate com-
                                   ponents, components within components, or components missing critical
                                   attributes or that do not comply with standards established by the team.
                                   The Solibri Model Checker also allows users to provide more sophisticated
                                   queries and tests; for example, whether the model contains specified infor-
                                   mation types. These features are relevant to owners who are considering
                                   using the model during post-construction phases or require operation-
                                   specific information.

                                   4.5.3 Project Communication and Model Review Tools
                                   Project communication occurs formally and informally on a variety of levels.
                                   Through contractual requirements, owners dictate the format, timing,
                                   and method of communication related to project deliverables. In this way,
                                   they often establish: the baseline project documentation format, modes of
                                   project information exchange, and expected project workflows. Within this
                                   formal communication is the daily exchange of information between project
                                   participants; and this is often impacted by the contractual relationship
                                   between those participants and the overall procurement method. Traditional




c04.indd 122                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:57:23 PM
                                                                                  4.5 BIM Tool Guide for Owners     123

                                                                                                   FIGURE 4-15
                                                                                                   Snapshots of Solibri
                                                                                                   Model Checker™
                                                                                                   showing: A) the
                                                                                                   validation of escape
                                                                                                   routes for a design;
                                                                                                   and B) the validation of
                                                                                                   model integrity.
                                                                                                   Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                   of Solibri.




               single-stage delivery methods tend to limit exchange between disciplines, and
               each individual discipline develops their own internal methods of project
               communication.
                   Thus, BIM-based project communication as it relates to the exchange of
               building information model data is quite different compared to traditional
               paper-based or ‘publish’ modes of information exchange. Consequently, the
               team (including the owner) needs to establish the protocols and tools that
               support the ongoing exchange, modification, and review of the building
               information model. In some cases, the owner may opt to control this commu-
               nication, as was done by Swire Properties in the One Island East Office Tower
               case study. In other cases, such as the General Motors Production Plant case
               study, the design-build team jointly develops and maintains the communication
               and model management tools.
                   Within these different structures of communication are detailed technical
               issues and protocols for managing that communication. Our discussion of
               these issues is limited to the exchange of building model information and does
               not address the challenges of managing communication and storing a wide
               variety of project information, such as contracts, specifications, RFIs, change
               orders, etc.
                   There are four different types of communication exchange related to the
               building information model (these are different in nature and format than
               the content in the exchange discussed in Chapter 3):




c04.indd 123                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:57:23 PM
         124 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                    a) Published snapshots are one-directional static views of the building
                                       information model that provide the receiving party with access only to
                                       the visual or filtered meta-data, such as bitmap images.
                                    b) Published building information model views and meta-data provide the
                                       receiving party with viewing access to the model and related data with
                                       limited capabilities to edit or modify data. PDF or DWF are such examples
                                       that allow users to view 2D or 3D and to mark-up, comment, and change
                                       certain view parameters or perform query functions on the model.
                                    c) Published files of the building information model include proprietary
                                       and standard file formats (.dwg, .rvt, .ifc), where access to the native
                                       data is possible.
                                    d) Direct database (DB) access provides users access to the project data-
                                       base either on a dedicated project server or distributed project server.
                                       The model data is controlled through access privileges and may allow
                                       only those users that create the content to edit it, or alternately the DB
                                       may provide more sophisticated edit and change capabilities.

                                     The “publish” methods of BIM exchange are common in BIM practice
                                today. The use of a project database accessible by project participants is less
                                common, but the General Motors Production Plant case study describes such
                                a scenario. Figure 4-16 shows a sample information workflow for a BIM-based
                                project that includes all four of these information exchanges. Most projects
                                will continue to use a variety of exchange methods to support various roles
                                within a project team.
                                     While service providers may select the tools and perform many of the func-
                                tions related to communication and management of the building information
                                model, they must do so in compliance with the needs and requirements of the
                                owner and the project. As a rule of thumb, for every designer or engineer that
                                uses a BIM tool, there will be another ten individuals seeking to view and review
                                the building information model. Communication methods (c) and (d), which
                                require proprietary tools and steep learning-curves to implement, may be imprac-
                                tical. Likewise, limiting methods of exchange to methods (a) and (b) will hinder
                                any ability to collaboratively create and modify the building information model.
                                     In the following section, a review of the tools that support these communi-
                                cation methods is organized into two categories: model viewing and review
                                tools and model management tools.

                                4.5.4 Model Viewing and Review
                                Two types of digital model viewing technologies are increasing in use. The first
                                are specialized model viewing tools that run on the desktop and can import and




c04.indd 124                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:24 PM
                                                                                                    4.5 BIM Tool Guide for Owners   125

                                                       C
                                                                 Model file
                                 Designer                                                            Engineer

                          A

                                                                        D
                  Snapshot of
                                                      Model                           Model
                    Model
                                                    components                      components      Contractor
                                              B


                                  Published                      Project Database
                                   Model                              Building
                  Interested                                        Information
                                                                                                      Model file
                                                                 Model Repository
                     Party

                                                    Model
                                                  components



                                  Owner                                                             Fabricator




               FIGURE 4-16 Conceptual diagram of the different types of communication exchange that
               might occur on a typical BIM-based project.
               This scenario shows a project using a central repository for the project, with the architect, owner,
               and contractor having access to that model. The architect publishes (A) snapshots and (B) models
               for interested parties and owners to review. The engineer exchanges model files (C) with the
               designer such as a .dwg, .rvt. or .dgn file. The contractor exchanges published views of the model,
               (D) such as PDF or DWF for their subcontractors.




               integrate a variety of model formats. These tools allow users to navigate through
               the model and query it interactively as well as to see sections or to view parts
               of the model; these support exchange methods B, C, and D. The second type
               includes Web-based viewing tools that import a standard format, such as
               Adobe® PDF or DWF™ and supports methods A and B. These tools also offer
               interactive navigation but require the model creator to publish in these formats.
               Owners will most likely encounter both types of tools on their projects and
               should consider what types of features the project team will use, including:
               comments/markup, take-off (dimensional queries), viewing, presentation,
               round-trip markup, and who will have access to the model. Examples of model
               viewers are Adobe® Acrobat® Professional, Autodesk® Design Review, and
               NavisWorks™ Roamer. Examples of Web-based model viewers are NavisWorks™
               Freedom and Actify Spinfire™ Reader.
                    When evaluating these tools an owner should consider the features listed
               in Table 4-3.




c04.indd 125                                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:24 PM
         126 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                Table 4-3     Model review features to consider.
                                                                       What formats does the tool import?
                                 File import features                (See Chapter 2 for a list of file formats.)

                                 Integrate models       Can the tool merge and integrate different types of file formats into
                                                        one view and model?

                                 Data import types      What types of non-geometric data does the tool import, and how
                                                        can the user view the meta-data or model properties?

                                 Multi-user support     Does the tool support multi-user access to a file or model or
                                                        “shared” viewing of a model over the network?

                                 Mark-up and            Can users mark up and comment in the tools? Are these mark-ups
                                 comment tools          time stamped and tracked for review?

                                 Model view support     Can the user view multiple views simultaneously? For example:
                                                        plan, section, and 3D views?

                                 Document view          Does the tool support viewing of related documents, such as text
                                                        files or images or spreadsheets?

                                 Dimension queries      Can a user easily measure in 2D and 3D?

                                 Property queries       Can the user select a building object and view the object proper-
                                                        ties or perform a query to find all objects with a specific property or
                                                        property value?

                                 Clash-detection        Does the model review tool support clash-detection? If so, can you
                                                        track the status of the clashes or classify the clashes?

                                 4D                     Does the model review tool include features to link the model objects
                                                        to schedule activities or support other types of time-based simulations?

                                 Re-organization        Can the user re-organize the model into functional or user-defined
                                 of the model           groups and control viewing or other functions with these
                                                        custom-defined groups?



                                4.5.5 Model Servers
                                Model servers are designed to store and manage access to the model and its
                                data either at a host site or on an internal server and network. Today, most
                                organizations use file-based servers that utilize standard file transfer protocols
                                to exchange data between the server and client. From the BIM perspective, file-
                                based servers do not yet directly link to or work with building information
                                models or building objects within those models, as they store data and provide
                                access only at the file level.
                                     Today, most collaboration management for BIM projects involves a model
                                manager manually integrating the models and creating project model files. The
                                case studies in Chapter 9 illustrate the challenges many companies face in
                                setting up work processes to manage models. In most cases, the organizations




c04.indd 126                                                                                                                   12/19/07 1:57:25 PM
                                                                                     4.5 BIM Tool Guide for Owners   127

               work with their internal IT groups to set up and maintain a server to host
               model files. In the General Motors Production Plant case study, the company
               used Bentley’s ProjectWise®; the One Island East Office Tower used Digital
               Project’s™ built-in features to support model management.
                   Off the shelf commercial model server solutions are not yet widely imple-
               mented and often require custom installation and trained IT staff to operate
               and maintain. Examples of model servers are:

                   • Bentley ProjectWise® (www.bentley.com)
                   • Enterprixe Model Server (www.enterprixe.com)
                   • EPM Technology EDMserver (www.epmtech.jotne.com)
                   • Eurostep modelserver for IFC (www.eurostep.com)
                   • SABLE developed by EuroSTEP (Hobaux 2005)


               4.5.6 Facility and Asset Management Tools
               Most existing facility management tools either rely on polygonal 2D informa-
               tion to represent spaces or numerical data entered in a spreadsheet. From most
               facility manager’s perspectives, managing spaces and their related equipment
               and facility assets does not require 3D information; but 3D, component-based
               models can add value to facility management functions.
                    Building models provide significant benefits in the initial phase of entering
               facility information and interacting with that information. With BIM, owners
               can utilize “space” components that define space boundaries in 3D, thus greatly
               reducing the time needed to create the facility’s database, since the traditional
               method involves manual space creation once the project is complete. The Coast
               Guard Facility Planning case study recorded a 98% reduction in time and
               effort to produce and update the facility management database by using a
               building information model.
                    Today, few tools exist that accept the input of BIM space components or
               other facility components representing fixed assets. Some of the tools that are
               currently available are:

                   • ActiveFacility (www.activefacility.com)
                   • ArchiFM (www.graphisoft.co.uk/products/archifm)
                   • Autodesk® FM Desktop™ (www.autodesk.com) (see Figure 4-17A)
                   • ONUMA Planning System™ (www.onuma.com/products/
                     OnumaPlanningSystem.php)
                   • Vizelia suite of FACILITY management products (www.vizelia.com)
                     (see Figure 4-17B)




c04.indd 127                                                                                                         12/19/07 1:57:25 PM
         128 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                          In addition to the general features that any FM system should support,
                                      owners should consider the following issues with respect to the use of such
                                      tools with building models:

                                          • Space object support. Does the tool import “space” objects from BIM
                                            authoring tools, either natively or via IFC? If so, what properties does
                                            the tool import?
                                          • Merging capabilities. Can data be updated or merged from multiple
                                            sources? For example, MEP systems from one system and spaces from
                                            another system?
                                          • Updating. If retrofit or reconfiguration of the facility takes place, can
                                            the system easily update the facility model? Can it track changes?

                                           Leveraging a building information model for facility management may
                                      require moving to purpose-built BIM facility tools, such as Autodesk® FM
                                      Desktop™ or to third-party BIM add-on tools.
                                           The use of BIM to support facility management is in its infancy and the
                                      tools have only recently become available in the marketplace. Owners should
                                      work with their facility management organizations to identify whether current
                                      facility management tools can support BIM spaces or whether a transition plan
                                      to migrate to BIM-capable facility management tools is required.

                                      4.5.7 Operation Simulation Tools
                                      Operation simulation tools are another emerging category of software tools for
                                      owners that use data from a building information model. These include crowd


          FIGURE 4-17A
          Autodesk®FM Desk-
          top™ showing a visual
          interface of the facility
          spaces and data views.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Autodesk, Inc.




c04.indd 128                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:57:26 PM
                                                                                            4.5 BIM Tool Guide for Owners    129

                                                                                                             FIGURE 4-17B
                                                                                                             Screenshot Vizelia
                                                                                                             FACILITY Space
                                                                                                             showing the 3D, color
                                                                                                             (shaded) coded view of
                                                                                                             spaces by type.
                                                                                                             Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                             of Vizelia, Inc.




               behavior (Still 2000), manufacturing, hospital procedure simulation, and
               emergency evacuation or response simulations. Many of them are provided by
               firms that also offer the services to perform the simulations and add necessary
               information. In all cases, the tools require additional input of information to
               perform the simulations; and in some cases, they only extract the geometric
               properties from the building information model. Table 4-4 summarizes some
               of the commercially available simulation tools.

               Table 4-4 Summary of commercially available operation simulation tools.
                Simulation Type      Company and Software Name                 Input BIM?

                Crowd behavior       Legion Studio (www.legion.com)            No
                                     eRENA ViCROWD                             No
                                     (www.erena.kth.se/crowds.html)
                                     Crowd Dynamics                            No
                                     (www.crowddynamics.com)

                Evacuation           IES Simulex                               Yes (via gbXML
                                     (www.iesve.com)                           ModelBuilder
                                                                               environment or DXF file)
                                     buildingExodus                            No (DXF file)
                                     (http://fseg.gre.ac.uk/exodus/)

                Operation            Common Point OpSim                        Yes (geometry)
                                     (www.commonpointinc.com)
                                     buildingExodus (fseg.gre.ac.uk/exodus/)   No (DXF file)

                                     SIMSuite (www.medsimulation.com)
                                     Flex-Sim: (www.hospital-simulation.com)




c04.indd 129                                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:26 PM
         130 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                     More typical examples of operation simulation tools do not involve spe-
                                cialized simulations but the use of real-time visualization or rendering tools
                                that take the building information model as input. For example, the fourth
                                author participated in the development of a 3D/4D model for Disney California
                                Adventure. With specialized tools and services, the same model was used to
                                simulate emergency scenarios and the ride rollercoaster (Schwegler et al. 2000).
                                Likewise, the Letterman Lucas Digital Arts center team used their model to
                                evaluate evacuation and emergency response scenarios (Boryslawski 2006;
                                Sullivan 2007).



                                     4.6 AN OWNER AND FACILITY MANAGER’S
                                         BUILDING MODEL

                                Owners need not only to be conversant in the kinds of BIM tools but also the
                                scope and level of detail they desire for a building model of their project. In
                                Chapters 5, 6, and 7, we discuss the types of information that designers, engi-
                                neers, contractors, and fabricators create and add to building information models
                                to support many of the BIM applications. To take advantage of post-construction
                                BIM applications, as discussed in Section 4.2 and listed in Figure 4-18, owners
                                need to work closely with their service providers to ensure that the building
                                model provides adequate scope, level of detail, and information for the purposes
                                intended. Figure 4-18 provides a framework for owners to understand the rela-
                                tionship between the level of detail in a model—masses, spaces, and construc-
                                tion-level detail (see vertical direction)—and the scope of a model, including
                                spatial and domain-specific elements such as architectural and detailed MEP
                                elements.
                                     Often, each service provider defines the scope and level of detail required for
                                their work. The owner can mandate the scope and level of detail required
                                for post-construction use of the model. For example, at the feasibility stage,
                                masses and spaces are sufficient to support most BIM applications for concep-
                                tual design. If the owner requires more integrative BIM applications, then both
                                the level of integration in the model (horizontal) and level of detail (vertical)
                                are increased in the effort to produce the model.
                                     Table 4-5 provides a partial list of some key types of information that the
                                building model needs to support for post-construction use. Some of this infor-
                                mation is represented in the IFC schema, as discussed in Chapter 2, and there
                                is a working group within the IAI, the “Facility Management Domain” (www.
                                iai-na.org/technical/fmdomain_report.php) that addresses facility-specific




c04.indd 130                                                                                                     12/19/07 1:57:27 PM
                                                                                                                                             4.6 An Owner and Facility Manager’s Building Model                                        131

                                                                                                                                                                                         Owners may have
                                                                                                                                                  Facilities                             multiple facilities and
                                                                                                                                                                                         models in their asset
                                                                                                                                                                                         management
                                                        Design/                                                                               Facility Building                                                         Post-
                                                      Construction                                                                           InformationModel                                                        Construction
                                                         BIM                                                                                                                                                           (Asset
                                                      Applications                                                                       Feasibility through operation                                              Management)
                                                        Pro Forma                                                                                                                                                  BIM Applications
                                                                                                                                                  Components             Relationships
                                                         Analysis                                                                                  (objects)                                                          Configuration
                                                                                                                                                                         between
                                                                                                                                                                         components                                    (pre-sales)
                                                         Scenario




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Facility startup to operation and retrotit
                                                        Exploration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        As-Built
                                                                                                              Concept




                     From conception to realization
                                                         Program
                                                        Compliance                                            Design                         Masses             Spaces                                               Commissioning
                                                         Building
                                                       Performance




                                                                        Increasing level of detail in model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Facility
                                                        Operation                                                                                                                                                     Management
                                                        Simulation                                            Design
                                                       (Emergency)                                            Documentation
                                                                                                                                Site   Spaces   Architectural     Structural       MEP
                                                                                                              (Generic                                                                                               Financial Asset
                                                                                                              components)                                                                                             Management
                                                          Code
                                                        Compliance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Operation
                                                                                                              Construction-                                                                                            Simulation
                                                        Estimation
                                                                                                              Level         Manufactured/Prefabricated            Custom, Onsite                                      (Emergency)
                                                                                                              Detailed            Components                       Components
                                                       Coordination                                           Components
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Performance
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Monitoring
                                                         Schedule
                                                                                                              As-Built
                                                                                                              With            Custom asset                       Sensor-linked                                        Configuration
                                                       Prefabrication                                         Operational       objects                          components                                             (retrofit)
                                                                                                              Data



               Example of associate purpose of                                                                  increasing levels of scope by component type and integration
                 BIM (application) with scope
                      and level of detail

               FIGURE 4-18 Conceptual diagram showing the relationship between various BIM applications during the facility delivery
               process; post-construction and their relationship to the level of scope and detail in the model.




               scenarios, such as move management, work order flows, costs, accounts, and
               financial elements in facility management. The IAI focuses on the representa-
               tion of this information within the building model.
                   Other resources for owners with respect to understanding and defining
               building information requirements are:

                    • OSCRE® (Open Standards Consortium for Real Estate, www.oscre.
                      org). This non-profit organization is defining information requirements
                      and standards for transaction-based scenarios, including appraisal, com-
                      mercial property information exchange, and facilities management work
                      orders.




c04.indd 131                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:57:27 PM
         132 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                Table 4-5     Owner’s building information model.
                                 Purpose                                               Type of Model Information

                                 To support program compliance and facility            Spaces and functions
                                 management. In a typical design process, the
                                 spatial information is defined to meet program
                                 compliance and support code-checking analysis.
                                 These are critical for program compliance and
                                 use of the BIM for facility management.
                                 To support commissioning activities such as           Performance specifications for HVAC
                                 performance specifications.                           and other facility operation equipment
                                 For post-construction analysis and tracking as well   As-built schedule and cost information
                                 as data for future forecasting.
                                 To budget and schedule maintenance.                   Manufactured product information
                                 For replacement costs and time periods and            Financial asset management data
                                 assessment information (See Coast Guard Facility
                                 Planning case study)
                                 To plan and prepare for evacuation and other          Emergency information
                                 emergency crises.
                                 To monitor and track progress of design,              Activity status
                                 construction, or maintenance activities.



                                    • Capital Facilities Information Handover Guide (NIST and FIATECH
                                      2006). This document defines information handover guidelines for each
                                      phase of facility delivery and the building’s lifecycle and elaborates many
                                      of the information issues discussed in this section.
                                    • OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium, www.opengeospatial.org). This
                                      non-profit standards organization is developing standards for geospatial
                                      data and has a specific working group looking at the integration of GIS
                                      and building model data.



                                     4.7 LEADING THE BIM IMPLEMENTATION
                                         ON A PROJECT

                                Owners control the selection of design service providers, the type of procure-
                                ment and delivery processes, and the overall specifications and requirements of
                                a facility. Unfortunately, many owners accept the current status quo and may
                                not perceive their ability to change or control how a building is delivered. They
                                may even be unaware of the benefits that can be derived from a BIM process.
                                    Owners cite challenges with changing standard design or construction
                                contracts produced by governing associations such as the American Institute




c04.indd 132                                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:57:28 PM
                                                                    4.7 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project   133

               of Architects (AIA) or the Association of General Contractors (AGC). The
               federal government, for example, faces many barriers to changing contracts
               since these are governed by agencies and legislatures. These challenges are real
               and the AIA, AGC, and federal agencies such as the GSA and Army Corps of
               Engineers are working toward instituting the contracting methods necessary to
               support more collaborative and integrated methods of procurement (see
               Chapters 5 and 6 for a discussion of these efforts). Yet, the case studies and the
               various projects cited in this book demonstrate a variety of ways in which
               owners can work within current contractual arrangements and overcome the
               barriers presented in Section 4.8. Owner leadership and involvement is a pre-
               requisite for optimal use of BIM on a project.
                    Owners can deliver maximum value to their organization by building inter-
               nal leadership and knowledge, by selecting service providers with BIM project
               experience and know-how, and by educating the network of service providers
               and changing contractual requirements.

               4.7.1 Build Internal Leadership and Knowledge
               The owner-led BIM efforts in Chapter 9 (Camino Group Medical Building,
               One Island East Office Tower, and Coast Guard Facility Planning) share two
               key processes: (1) the owner first developed internal knowledge about BIM
               technologies; and (2) the owner dedicated key personnel to lead the effort. For
               example, in the Camino Medical Building project, the owner examined internal
               work processes intensively and identified the tools and lean methods that could
               deliver the facilities more efficiently. In these projects, the owners did not
               develop the full knowledge of how to implement various BIM applications but
               created a project environment where service providers could constructively
               apply appropriate BIM applications.
                    The One Island East Office Tower case study shows a slightly different
               approach to building that knowledge. The owner, Swire Properties Inc., had
               done extensive research to improve the company’s ability to better deliver and
               manage their facilities and properties. They identified barriers related to the
               management of 2D information and the wide variety of project information.
               When they were presented with the concepts of building information mode-
               ling, they had the internal knowledge to know where to apply and leverage
               available BIM technologies.
                    The U.S. Coast Guard is building its internal knowledge and defining a
               roadmap for implementing BIM, as discussed in the Coast Guard Facility
               Planning case study (Brucker et al. 2006). This roadmap is a phased approach
               to implementing BIM across their organization and various facility projects.
               The knowledge necessary to build such a roadmap was the result of pilot




c04.indd 133                                                                                                          12/19/07 1:57:28 PM
         134 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                projects and a significant investigation and research effort led by various groups
                                within the U.S. Coast Guard. The roadmap includes both milestones related to
                                specific BIM technology applications for managing project information and
                                facility assets as well as milestones for procuring and delivering facilities using
                                various BIM applications.
                                     All of these cases demonstrate owners that developed knowledge through
                                an exploration of their own internal business models and work processes
                                related to delivering and operating facilities. They understood the inefficiencies
                                inherent in their current work processes and how they impacted the bottom
                                line. In so doing, key members of the staff were equipped with the knowledge
                                and skills to lead the BIM effort.

                                4.7.2 Service Provider Selection
                                Unlike the case in global manufacturing industries, such as that of automobiles
                                or semiconductors, no single owner organization dominates the building mar-
                                ket. Even the largest owner organizations, which are typically government
                                agencies, represent only a small fraction of the overall domestic and global
                                facility markets. Consequently, efforts to standardize processes, technologies,
                                and industry standards are far more challenging within the AEC industry than
                                in industries with clear market leaders. With no market leaders, owners often
                                look at what their competition is doing or to industry organizations as guides
                                for best practice or latest technology trends. In addition, many owners build or
                                initiate only one project and lack expertise to take a leadership position. What
                                all owners share, though, is the control over how they select service providers
                                and the format of project deliverables.
                                     Owners can use a number of methods to ensure that the service providers
                                working on their project are conversant in BIM and its related processes:
                                     Modifying job skill requirements to include BIM related skills and
                                expertise. For internal hires, owners can require prospective employees to
                                have specific skills, such as 3D and knowledge of BIM or component-based
                                design. Many organizations are now hiring employees with BIM-specific job
                                titles such as BIM Specialist, BIM Champion, BIM Administrator, 4D
                                Specialist, and Manager, Virtual Design and Construction. Owners may hire
                                employees with these titles or find service providers that bear similar ones.
                                Some examples of job skill requirements are detailed in the box titled
                                “Examples of Job Skill Requirements.” (J.E. Dunn 2007).
                                     Including BIM-specific pre-qualification criteria. Many Requests for
                                Proposals (RFPs) by owners include a set of pre-qualification criteria for pro-
                                spective bidders. For public works projects, these are typically standard forms
                                that all potential bidders must fill out. Commercial owners can formulate their




c04.indd 134                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:57:29 PM
                                                                    4.7 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project   135

               own pre-qualification criteria. An excellent example is the qualification require-
               ments formulated by hospital owner Sutter Health that are described in the
               Camino Group Medical Building case study. These include explicit require-
               ments for experience and the ability to use 3D modeling technologies. Similarly,
               GM and the design-build team of Ghafari/Ideal (General Motors Production
               Plant case study) selected consultants and subcontractors with 3D experience
               and a willingness to participate in the use of 3D building models on the
               project.
                    Interviewing prospective service providers. Owners should take the time
               to meet designers face-to-face in the pre-qualification process, since any poten-
               tial service provider can fill out a qualification form and note experience with
               specific tools without having project experience. One owner even prefers
               meeting at the designer’s office to see the work environment and the types of
               tools and processes available in the workplace. The interview might include
               the following types of questions:

                   • What BIM technologies does your organization use and how did you
                     use them on previous projects? Perhaps use a modified list of BIM
                     application areas from Table 4-1 as a guide.
                   • What organizations collaborated with you in the creation, modifica-
                     tion, and updating of the building model? If the question is asked to



                 Examples of Job Skill Requirements
                 • Minimum 3-4 years experience in the design and/or construction of
                   commercial buildings structures
                 • BS Degree (or equivalent) in construction management, engineering,
                   or architecture
                 • Demonstrated knowledge of building information modeling
                 • Demonstrated proficiency in one of the major BIM applications and
                   familiarity with review tools
                 • Working knowledge and proficiency with any of the following:
                   Navisworks, SketchUp, Autodesk® Architectural Desktop, and
                   Building Systems (or specific BIM applications that your organization
                   uses)
                 • Solid understanding of the design, documentation, and construction
                   processes and the ability to communicate with field personnel




c04.indd 135                                                                                                          12/19/07 1:57:29 PM
         136 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                      an architect, then find out if the structural engineer, contractor, or pre-
                                      fabricator contributed to the model and how the different organizations
                                      worked together.
                                    • What were the lessons learned and metrics measured on these projects
                                      with respect to the use of the model and BIM tools? And how were
                                      these incorporated into your organization? This helps to identify evi-
                                      dence of learning and change within an organization.
                                    • How many people are familiar with BIM tools in your organization and
                                      how do you educate and train your staff?
                                    • Does your organization have specific job titles and functions related to
                                      BIM (such as those listed previously)? This indicates a clear commit-
                                      ment and recognition of the use of BIM in their organization.


                                4.7.3 Build and Educate a Qualified Network of
                                      BIM Service Providers
                                One of the challenges for owners is finding service providers proficient with
                                BIM technologies within their existing network. This has led several owners
                                to lead proactive efforts to educate potential service providers, internal and
                                external, through workshops, conferences, seminars, and guides. Here are
                                three examples:
                                     Formal education. The United States General Services Administration has
                                established a National 3D/4D BIM Program (General Services Administration
                                2006). Part of this effort includes educating the public and potential service
                                providers and changing how they procure work (see next section). The educa-
                                tional efforts include working with BIM vendors, professional associations such
                                as the AIA and AGC, as well as standards organizations and universities, by
                                sponsoring seminars and workshops. Each of the ten GSA regions has a desig-
                                nated BIM “champion” to push adoption and application to projects in their
                                respective regions. For example, the authors have each been invited to present
                                BIM concepts to various owners’ groups, both in the U.S. and other parts of the
                                world. Unlike some commercial organizations, the GSA does not view its BIM
                                expertise and knowledge as proprietary and recognizes that for the GSA to ulti-
                                mately benefit from the potential of BIM, all project participants need to be
                                conversant with BIM technologies and processes.
                                     Informal education. Sutter Health’s educational efforts are largely cen-
                                tered around implementing lean processes and BIM technologies on their
                                projects (Sutter Health et al. 2006). Sutter invited service providers to attend
                                informal workshops with presentations on lean concepts, 3D, and 4D. Sutter
                                also supports project teams using BIM technologies to conduct similar




c04.indd 136                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:29 PM
                                                                     4.7 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project   137

               workshops open to industry professionals. These informal workshops provide
               ways for professionals to share experiences and learn from others and ulti-
               mately to widen the number of service providers available to bid on future
               Sutter projects.
                   Training support. A critical part of education, beyond teaching BIM con-
               cepts and applications, is related to technical training for specific BIM tools.
               This often requires both technical education of BIM concepts and features for
               transitioning from 2D- to 3D-component parametric modeling as well as soft-
               ware training to learn the specific features of the BIM tools. For many service
               providers, the transition is costly, and it is difficult to justify initial training
               costs. Swire Properties (One Island East Office Tower) recognized this as a
               potential barrier and paid for the training of the design team to use specific
               BIM tools on their project.

               4.7.4 Change Deliverable Requirements:
                     Modify Contracts and Contract Language
               Owners can control which BIM applications are implemented on their projects
               through the type of project delivery process they select and with BIM-specific
               contractual or RFP requirements. Changing the delivery process is often more
               difficult than changing the requirements. Many owners first start with changes
               in the RFP and contracts in three areas:

                     1. Scope and detail of the model information. This includes defining the
               format of project documentation and changing from 2D paper to a 3D digital
               model. Owners may choose to forego specific requirements pertaining to the
               3D format and the types of information service providers include in the model
               (see Figure 4-18 and Section 4.6); or owners can provide detailed language for
               those requirements (see the Camino Group Medical Building case study). As
               owners gain experience, the nature of these requirements will better reflect the
               types of BIM applications an owner desires and the information that the owner
               team demands throughout the delivery process and subsequent operation of
               the facility. Table 4-6 provides a reference for the types of information an
               owner should consider relative to desired BIM applications.
                     2. Uses of model information. This includes specifying services more
               readily performed with BIM tools, such as 3D coordination, real-time review
               of design, frequent value engineering using cost estimating software, or energy
               analysis. All of these services could be performed with traditional 2D and 3D
               technologies; but providers using BIM tools would most likely be more com-
               petitive and capable of providing such services. For example, 3D coordination
               is greatly facilitated through BIM tools. Tables 4-1, 4-2, and 4-6 provide a




c04.indd 137                                                                                                           12/19/07 1:57:30 PM
         138 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                summary of the BIM applications owners can use as a basis to describe the
                                services relevant to their specific projects.
                                       3. Organization of model information. This includes project work break-
                                down structure and is discussed in Section 4.5.1. Many owners overlook this
                                type of requirement. Today, CAD layer standards or Primavera activity fields
                                are templates for how designers organize the project documentation and the
                                building information. Similarly, owners or the project team need to establish
                                an initial information organization structure. This may be based on the geome-
                                try of the project site (Northeast section) or the building structure (East wing,
                                Building X). The One Island East and Camino Medical Building case studies
                                both discuss the project work breakdown structure that the teams employed to
                                facilitate the exchange of building information model information and project
                                documentation. Efforts are underway to establish building model standards,
                                such as the National Building Information Model Standard. The NBIMS should
                                provide much-needed definition and a useful resource for owners to define the
                                project work breakdown structure. The U.S. Coast Guard, for example, refer-
                                ences these within their milestones.

                                     These requirements, however, are often difficult to meet without some
                                modifications to the fee structure and relationships between project participants
                                or without the use of incentive plans that define the workflow and digital
                                hand-offs between disciplines. Often, these are more difficult to define in a
                                workflow centered on a digital model, as opposed to files and documents.
                                Additionally, approval agencies still require 2D project documentation as do
                                standard professional contracts (as was the case in the Penn National Parking
                                Structure case study). Consequently, many owners maintain the traditional
                                document and file-based deliverables (see Figure 4-19); and they insert digital
                                3D workflows and deliverables into the same process. That is, each discipline
                                works independently on their scope and BIM applications and hands-off the
                                3D digital model at specified times.
                                     The case studies contained in Chapter 9 provide excellent examples of how
                                owners have modified their delivery processes to support a more collaborative
                                real-time workflow. These modifications include:

                                    Modified design-build delivery. The GM Production Plant project dem-
                                    onstrates a collaborative process achieved through modifications to the
                                    design-build delivery process. GM hired the design-build team and then
                                    participated in the selection of subcontractors and additional design con-
                                    sultants. The goal was to form the team as early as possible and engage
                                    them from the outset.




c04.indd 138                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:30 PM
                                                                                                                         4.7 Leading the BIM Implementation on a Project                                                                     139

               Table 4-6 Relationship between the BIM application area and the required scope and
               level of detail in the building model.



                                                                               BIM Scope                                                         Component Property Types
                                                                                                                          Constru-
                                                        Concept                           Generic                          ction
                                                                                                                           Level




                                                                                                                                          Geometric Properties   Material Properties
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Constructability

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Manufacturer
                                                                                                                          Prefabricated


                                                                          Architectural                                                                                                Functional
                                                                                                                          Components

                                               Masses     Spaces                          Structural         Utilities                                                                                     (Method)
                                                                                                                          Custom
                BIM Application Area                               Site                                MEP                Components                                                                Cost

                Design/Construction

               Pro Forma Analysis              •          •        •                                                                         •                                          •           •

               Scenario Exploration            •          •        •       •                                                                 •

               Program Compliance                         •                •                                                                 •                                          •

               Building Performance                                        •               •           •                                     •                     •                    •                                      •

               Operation Simulation                                        •               •           •                                     •                                          •                                      •

               Code Compliance                                             •               •           •                                     •

               Cost                                                        •               •           •                   •      •          •                     •                                •          •               •

               Coordination                                                •               •           •                   •      •          •

               Schedule                                                    •               •           •                                     •                     •                                           •               •

               Prefabrication                                              •               •           •                   •      •          •                     •

                Post Construction/Operations

               Configuration                                               •               •                               •      •          •                                          •                      •               •

               Commissioning                                               •               •           •                   •      •          •                                                                                 •

               Facility Management                        •                                                                                  •                                          •

               Financial Asset management                 •                •               •           •                                     •                                                      •

               Operation Simulation                                        •               •           •                                     •                                          •

               Performance monitoring                                      •               •           •                                     •                                          •

               Built                                                       •               •           •                   •      •          •                     •                                           •               •

               Configuration (retrofit)                                    •               •           •                   •      •          •                     •                    •                      •               •




c04.indd 139                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12/19/07 1:57:31 PM
         140 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

          FIGURE 4-19                                           Facility Delivery Process and Lifecycle
          Typical contract deliv-
                                     Traditional Deliverables                                               Deliverables with BIM
          erables as a function of           to Owner                                                     technologies and process
          the traditional design-                                         Market Demands/
                                                                               Needs
          bid-build process com-
          pared to the types of          Project Scope/                                                        Project Scope/
          deliverables that result         Objectives                                                            Objectives
          from a collaborative                                            Feasibility/Concept
          BIM-based process.                                                Development
          Owners will need to                                                (Chapter 5)
                                       Conceptual Plan,                                                         Conceptual
          change contracts and           Preliminary                                                          Building Model,
          language to promote              Design                                                              Estimate, Plan
          the use of BIM.                                                      Design
                                                                           and Engineering
                                         Construction                        (Chapter 5)
                                         Drawings and                                                         Building Model
                                         Specifications
                                                                            Construction
                                                                          (Chapter 6 and 7)

                                           As-Built                                                           As-Built Building
                                           Drawings                                                               Model

                                                                           Occupy/Startup
                                                                            (Chapter 4)




                                                                          Operate/Maintain
                                                                            (Chapter 4)




                                         Performance-based contracts. Performance-based contracts or perform-
                                         ance-based acquisition (PBA) focus on results, are typically fixed-fee, and
                                         allow service providers to deliver a facility or their services using their
                                         own best practices (Department of Defense 2000). This emphasizes the
                                         outcome, as defined by the owner, rather than intermediate milestones
                                         or deliverables. Many government agencies are moving to this approach,
                                         targeting 40%–50% of new work using this approach (General Services
                                         Administration 2007). This type of contract typically requires that the
                                         owner spend more time early in the project to define the facility require-
                                         ments and structure the contracts to accommodate such an approach. This
                                         approach may seem a contradiction to the previous recommendations; but
                                         service providers utilizing BIM will most likely be more competitive and
                                         requirements can be BIM-based.




c04.indd 140                                                                                                                      12/19/07 1:57:31 PM
                                                         4.8 Barriers to Implementing BIM: Risks and Common Myths   141

                   Shared Incentive plans. Performance-based contracts are often imple-
                   mented with shared incentive plans. When all members collaborate on
                   most phases of building, there is no clear partitioning of organization
                   contributions. The Camino Group Medical Building case study provides
                   an example of a shared incentive plan designed to distribute cost savings
                   to the project team. It provides financial incentives based on the overall
                   project performance and not solely on individual organizational perform-
                   ance. These plans are often difficult to define and implement, as the case
                   study demonstrates. Nonetheless, shared incentive plans reward teams for
                   collaborative performance rather than local optimization of discipline-
                   specific performance.




                    4.8 BARRIERS TO IMPLEMENTING BIM:
                        RISKS AND COMMON MYTHS

               There are risks associated with any changes to work processes. Realistic and
               perceived barriers and changes related to implementing BIM applications on
               projects are no exception. These barriers fall into two categories: process bar-
               riers to the business, including legal and organizational issues that prevent
               BIM implementation; and technology barriers related to readiness and imple-
               mentation. These are summarized below.


               4.8.1 Process Barriers
               The market is not ready—it’s still in the innovator phase. Many owners believe
               that if they change the contracts to require new types of deliverables, specifi-
               cally 3D or building information models, they will not receive competitive
               bids, limiting their potential pool of bidders and ultimately increasing the price
               of the project. Recent surveys do indicate that a majority of service providers
               are not actively using BIM technologies on their projects. These same surveys,
               however, indicate increasing rates of adoption and awareness of BIM concepts
               and applications:

                   • 75% of architects are using some level of 3D, with one-third of those
                     using BIM as a construction resource and one-third using it for “intel-
                     ligent modelling” (Gonchar 2007). These users preferred BIM to tradi-
                     tional 2D CAD, because of the visualization and value to the customer
                     (owner), greater accuracy, coordination, and efficiency. This indicates




c04.indd 141                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:31 PM
         142 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                      early success and potential ongoing growth. These firms are continuing
                                      to invest and expand their use of BIM.
                                    • Service providers would use 3D and BIM approaches more if owners
                                      (clients) asked for it (Green Building Studio 2004).

                                     The case studies and many additional references in this book also indicate
                                a transition from innovator to early adopter phase for design-related BIM
                                applications. As the use of BIM increases, owners will find increasing numbers
                                of service providers capable of using BIM.
                                     The project is already financed and design is complete—it’s not worth it
                                to implement BIM. As a project nears construction, it’s true that owners and
                                the project team will miss valuable opportunities available through the use of
                                BIM applications, such as conceptual estimating and program compliance.
                                There is still ample time and opportunity, however, to implement BIM in the
                                latter stages of design and through the early phases of construction. For exam-
                                ple, the BIM implementation in the One Island East Office Tower case study
                                began after construction documents were started. The BIM implementation on
                                the Letterman Digital Arts Center, driven by the owner, began post-design and
                                resulted in significant identification of design discrepancies and estimated cost
                                savings of $10 million (Boryslawski 2006). The team, however, recognized
                                that had the effort started earlier even more cost savings and benefits would
                                have been realized.
                                     Training costs and the learning curve are too high. Implementing new
                                technologies such as BIM technologies is costly in terms of training and chang-
                                ing work processes and workflows. The dollar investment in software and
                                hardware is typically exceeded by the training costs and initial productivity
                                losses. This can be seen clearly in the adoption cash flow example in Chapter 7.
                                Often, most service providers are not willing to make such an investment unless
                                they perceive the long-term benefit to their own organization and/or if the
                                owner subsidizes the training costs. In the One Island East Office Tower case
                                study, the owner understood that the potential gains in productivity, quality,
                                and asset management outweighed the initial costs and paid for the training.
                                     Everyone must be on board to make the BIM effort worthwhile. It is often
                                difficult to ensure that all project participants have the know-how and willing-
                                ness to participate in the creation or use of the building information model.
                                Many of the case studies in Chapter 9 demonstrate the benefits of BIM
                                implementation without full participation but also highlight challenges with
                                re-creating information from organizations not participating in the modeling
                                effort. The Letterman Digital Arts Center (Boryslawski 2006) demonstrates
                                how an owner can mitigate the risk of non-participation. The owner hired a




c04.indd 142                                                                                                  12/19/07 1:57:32 PM
                                                         4.8 Barriers to Implementing BIM: Risks and Common Myths   143

               third-party to manage the BIM effort and recreate information as required. As
               the project progressed, the third-party was able to identify organizations with
               BIM modeling capabilities and have them participate in the process. The owner
               supported the effort but did not mandate full participation in the BIM effort.
                    Too many legal barriers exist and they are too costly to overcome.
               Contractual and legal changes are required on several fronts to facilitate the
               use of BIM and more collaborative project teams. Even the digital exchange of
               project information is sometimes difficult today, and teams are often forced to
               exchange only paper drawings and rely on old-fashioned contracts. Public
               institutions face even greater challenges, since they are often governed by laws
               that take considerable time to change. Nonetheless, several government agen-
               cies and private companies have overcome these barriers and are working
               toward contract language that not only changes the nature of how information
               is exchanged within the project team but the liability and risks associated with
               a more collaborative effort. The Camino Medical Building, GM Production
               Plant, and Federal Courthouse case studies are examples.
                    The primary challenge is the assignment of responsibility and risk. BIM
               implementation centralizes information that is “broadly accessible,” depends
               on constant updating, and subjects designers to increased potential liability
               (Ashcraft 2006). The legal profession recognizes these barriers and the neces-
               sary risk-allocation changes that need to take place. This is a real barrier, one
               that will continue to persist and will depend on professional organizations
               such as the AIA and AGC to revise standard contracts and/or owners to revise
               their own contract terms.
                    Issues of model ownership and management will be too demanding on
               owner resources. BIM potentially requires insight across multiple organiza-
               tions and aspects of the project. Typically, a construction manager (CM)
               provides the oversight by managing communication and reviewing project
               documentation. The CM also oversees that the process is aligned with specific
               deliverables and milestones. With BIM, issue discovery and problem identifica-
               tion occur early and more frequently, enabling teams to resolve issues early;
               but this often requires owner input, which should be seen as a benefit and not
               a drawback. The current slack in the delivery process is significantly reduced,
               demanding more direct owner involvement. The process is more fluid and
               interactive. Owner requested changes will become less transparent and the
               impacts of these changes will demand ongoing participation. Managing this
               process and the related management of the model will become critical to the
               project. Owners need to establish clear roles and responsibilities and methods
               to communicate with the project team and ensure that an owner representative
               is available as-needed.




c04.indd 143                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:32 PM
         144 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                4.8.2 Technology Risks and Barriers
                                Technology is ready for single-discipline design but not integrated design. It
                                is true that two–five years ago the creation of an integrated model required
                                extensive effort on the part of a project team and dedicated technical expertise
                                to support that integration. Today, many of the BIM design tools reviewed in
                                Chapter 2 have matured and provide integration capabilities between several
                                disciplines at the generic object level (see Figure 4-18). As the scope of the
                                model and number and types of building components increase, however, per-
                                formance issues also increase. Thus, most project teams choose to use model
                                review tools to support integration tasks, such as coordination, schedule simu-
                                lation, and operation simulation. The Camino Medical Building and GM
                                Production Plant projects, for example, used the Navisworks model review
                                tool to perform clash detection and design coordination. Currently, BIM design
                                environments are typically good for one or two-discipline integration. The inte-
                                gration of construction-level detail is more difficult, and model review tools are
                                the best solution to achieve this.
                                     A greater barrier is related to work process and model management.
                                Integrating multiple disciplines requires multi-user access to the building infor-
                                mation model. This does require technical expertise, establishment of proto-
                                cols to manage updates and edits of the model, and establishing a network and
                                server to store and access the model. It also provides an excellent context for
                                new users to learn from more experienced ones.
                                     Owners should perform audits with their project teams to determine the
                                type of integration and analysis capabilities that are desired and currently avail-
                                able and prioritize accordingly. Full integration is possible but does require
                                expertise, planning, and proper selection of BIM tools.
                                     Standards are not yet defined or widely adopted—so we should wait.
                                Chapter 3 discusses the various standards efforts, such as IFCs and the National
                                BIM Standards, which will greatly enhance interoperability and widespread BIM
                                implementation. In practice, however, these formats are rarely used, and most
                                organizations use proprietary formats for model exchange. For many owners,
                                this poses a risk to the short and long term investments in any building infor-
                                mation modelling effort. There are owner-specific standardization efforts
                                related to real estate transactions and facility management, as discussed previ-
                                ously; however, the case studies in this book, with the exception of the Jackson
                                Courthouse and the GM Flint plant, demonstrate that a variety of successful
                                BIM implementations have been achieved without reliance on these standards;
                                and it is not a barrier to implementation.




c04.indd 144                                                                                                    12/19/07 1:57:32 PM
                                               4.9 Guidelines and Issues for Owners to Consider When Adopting BIM   145

                    4.9 GUIDELINES AND ISSUES FOR OWNERS
                        TO CONSIDER WHEN ADOPTING BIM

               Adopting BIM alone will not necessarily lead to project success. BIM is a set of
               technologies and evolving work processes that must be supported by the team,
               the management, and a cooperative owner. BIM will not replace excellent man-
               agement, a good project team, or a respectful work culture. Here are some key
               factors an owner should consider when adopting BIM.
                   Perform a pilot project with a short time frame, small qualified team,
               and a clear goal. The initial effort should use either internal resources or
               trusted service providers that your organization has worked with. The more
               knowledge an owner builds with respect to the implementation and applica-
               tion of BIM, the more likely future efforts will succeed, as the owner develops
               core competencies to identify and select qualified service providers and forge
               cooperative teams.
                   Do a prototype dry run. When doing a pilot project, it’s always best to
               do a dry run and make sure the tools and processes are in place to succeed.
               This may be as simple as giving the designer a small design task that show-
               cases the desired BIM applications. For example, the owner can ask the design
               team to design a conference room for twenty people, with specific targets for
               budget and energy consumption. The deliverable should include a building
               information model (or models to reflect two or three options) and the related
               energy and cost analysis. This is an example of a design task that is achievable
               in one or two days. The architect can build the model and work with an MEP
               engineer and estimator to produce a set of prototype results. This requires
               that the project participants work out the kinks in the process, so to speak,
               and also allows the owner to provide guidance regarding the types of infor-
               mation and formats of presentation that provide clear, valuable, and rapid
               feedback.
                   Focus on clear business goals. While this chapter cites many different
               benefits, no single project has yet achieved all of these benefits. In many cases,
               the owner started with a specific problem or goal and succeeded. The GSA’s
               pilot project efforts (Dakan 2006), for example, each involved one type of BIM
               application for nine different projects. The application areas included energy
               analysis, space planning, Lidar scanning to collect accurate as-built data, and
               4D simulation. The success in meeting focused and manageable goals led to
               expanded use of multiple BIM applications on projects such as the Federal
               Courthouse case study.




c04.indd 145                                                                                                        12/19/07 1:57:33 PM
         146 Chapter 4 BIM for Owners and Facility Managers

                                     Establish metrics to assess progress. Metrics are critical to assessing the
                                implementation of new processes and technologies. Many of the case studies
                                include project metrics, such as reduced change orders or rework, variance
                                from baseline schedule or baseline cost, reduction in typical square footage
                                cost. There are several excellent sources for metrics or goals relevant to spe-
                                cific owner organizations or projects, including:

                                    • Construction Users Roundtable (CURT). This owner-led group holds
                                      workshops and conferences and issues several publications on their
                                      Web site (www.curt.org) for identifying key project and performance
                                      metrics.
                                    • CIFE Working Paper on Virtual Design and Construction (Kunz and
                                      Fischer, 2007). This paper documents specific types of metrics and
                                      goals along with case study examples.

                                    Also, see Section 5.4.1 for the development of assessment metrics related
                                to design.
                                    Participate in the BIM effort. An owner’s participation is a key factor of
                                project success, because the owner is in the best position to lead a project team
                                to collaborate in ways that exploit BIM to its fullest benefit. All of the case
                                studies in which owners took leadership roles—General Motors Production
                                Plant, Federal Courthouse, Camino Group Medical Building, One Island East
                                Office Tower, and Coast Guard Facility Planning—demonstrate the value of
                                the owner’s participation in proactively leading the BIM implementation. They
                                also highlight the benefits of ongoing involvement in that process. BIM appli-
                                cations, such as those for BIM design review, enable owners to better partici-
                                pate and more easily provide the necessary feedback. The participation and
                                leadership of owners is critical to the success of the collaborative project teams
                                that exploit BIM.




c04.indd 146                                                                                                   12/19/07 1:57:33 PM
                                      4.9 Guidelines and Issues for Owners to Consider When Adopting BIM   147


               Chapter 4 Discussion Questions
                      1. List three types of procurement methods and how these
                         methods do or do not support the use of BIM technologies
                         and processes.
                      2. Imagine you are an owner embarking on a new project
                         and have attended several workshops discussing the
                         benefits of BIM. What steps would you take to identify
                         whether you should support and promote the use of BIM
                         on your project?
                      3. If the owner did decide to adopt BIM, what types of
                         decisions would be needed to ensure the project team’s
                         success in using BIM at each stage of the building life-cycle?
                      4. With respect to the application and benefits of BIM
                         technologies and processes, what are the key differences
                         between an owner who builds to sell the facility vs. an
                         owner who builds to operate?
                      5. Imagine you are an owner developing a contract to
                         procure a project using a collaborative approach through
                         the use of BIM. What are some of the key provisions
                         that the contract should include to promote team
                         collaboration, the use of BIM, and project success?
                      6. List and discuss three risks associated with using BIM and
                         how they can be mitigated.
                      7. List two or three processes or project factors that influence
                         the success of BIM implementation.
                      8. Imagine you are an owner building your first project and
                         plan to own and occupy the facility for the next
                         15–20 years. You do not plan to build another facility
                         and will outsource its design and construction. Should you
                         consider BIM? If so, list two or three reasons why BIM would
                         benefit your organization, and describe what steps you
                         might take to achieve the benefits you cite. If you believe that
                         BIM would not benefit your project, explain why.
                      9. List three market trends that are influencing the adoption
                         and use of BIM and how BIM enables owners to respond
                         to those market trends.




c04.indd 147                                                                                               12/19/07 1:57:34 PM
               CHAPTER                       5
               BIM for Architects and Engineers



                      5.0      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                    uilding Information Modeling can be considered an epochal transition in
               B    design practice. Unlike CADD, which primarily automates aspects of tradi-
               tional drawing production, BIM is a paradigm change. By partially automating
               the detailing of construction level building models, BIM redistributes the
               distribution of effort, placing more emphasis on conceptual design. Other direct
               benefits include easy methods guaranteeing consistency across all drawings and
               reports, automating spatial interference checking, providing a strong base for
               interfacing analysis/simulation/cost applications and enhancing visualization at
               all scales and phases of the project.
                    This chapter examines the impact of BIM on design from four viewpoints:

                    • Conceptual design typically includes resolution of siting, building
                      orientation and massing, satisfaction of the building program, address-
                      ing sustainability and energy issues, construction and possibly operating
                      costs and sometimes issues requiring design innovation. BIM poten-
                      tially supports much greater integration and feedback for early design
                      decisions.
                    • The integration of engineering services; BIM supports new information
                      workflows and integrates them more closely with existing simulation
                      and analysis tools used by consultants.
                    • Construction level modeling includes detailing, specifications and cost
                      estimation. This is the base strength of BIM.

               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   149



c05.indd 149                                                                                                                       12/19/07 4:15:52 PM
          150 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                     • Design-construction integration addressing the scope of innovation that
                                       can potentially be achieved through a collaborative design-construction
                                       process, such as with the design-build procurement model.

                                      Different design projects can be categorized according to the level of infor-
                                 mation development required for realizing them, ranging from predictable
                                 franchise-type buildings to experimental architecture. The information devel-
                                 opment concept facilitates distinguishing the varied processes and tools
                                 required for designing and constructing all varieties of buildings.
                                      This chapter also addresses issues of adoption of BIM into practice, such
                                 as: the evolutionary steps to replace 2D drawings with 3D digital models; auto-
                                 mated drawing and document preparation; managing the level of detail within
                                 building models; the development and management of libraries of components
                                 and assemblies; and new means for integrating specifications and cost estima-
                                 tion. The chapter concludes with a review of the practical concerns that design
                                 firms face when attempting to implement BIM, including: the selection and
                                 evaluation of BIM authoring tools; training; office preparation; initiating a BIM
                                 project; and planning ahead for the new roles and services that a BIM-based
                                 design firm will evolve toward.
                                      Building Information Modeling provides major challenges and opportunities
                                 to design firms. While there are clear economic benefits for fabricators to employ
                                 3D parametric modeling and interoperability for use in automation and other
                                 productivity benefits, the direct benefits to design are more difficult to quantify.
                                 However, BIM integration with analysis and simulation, and improving the qual-
                                 ity of design, especially in its early stages, provides value to owners equivalent or
                                 even greater than any savings in construction costs; design quality is long lasting,
                                 offering benefits over the life of a building. Developing these new capabilities
                                 and services, then employing them to gain recognition and serve as a basis for
                                 new and repeat work, is a path encouraged for all design firms, large and small.
                                 BIM increases the value that designers can offer to clients and the public.



                                      5.1 INTRODUCTION

                                 In 1452, early Renaissance architect Leon Battista Alberti distinguished archi-
                                 tectural design from construction by proposing that the essence of design lay in
                                 the thought processes associated with conveying lines on paper. His goal was to
                                 differentiate the intellectual task of design from the craft of construction. Prior
                                 to Alberti, in the first century BC, Vitruvius discussed the value inherent in using
                                 plans, elevations, and perspectives to convey design intent in what is considered
                                 to be the first treatise on architecture (Morgan 1960; Alberti 1987). Throughout




c05.indd 150                                                                                                       12/19/07 4:15:55 PM
                                                                                                        5.1 Introduction   151

               architectural history, drawing has remained the dominant mode of representa-
               tion. Even now, contemporary authors often critique how different architects
               use drawings and sketches to enhance their thinking and creative work (Robbins
               1994). The extent of this time-honored tradition is further apparent in the way
               that computers were first adopted as an aid for automating certain aspects of the
               design-to-construction process, which was succinctly expressed in the original
               meaning of the term CADD – computer-aided design and drafting.
                    Because of this history, what is being called Building Information Modeling
               (BIM) can be considered revolutionary in the way it transforms architectural think-
               ing by replacing drawings with a new foundation for representing design and for
               aiding communication, construction, and archiving based on 3D digital models.
                    BIM can also be thought of as the conceptual equivalent of crafting scale
               models of buildings within a virtual digital 3D computer-based environment. Unlike
               physical models, virtual models can be accurate at any scale; they are digitally read-
               able and writable; and they can be automatically detailed and analyzed in ways that
               are not possible with physical scale models. They may contain information that is
               not expressible in a physical model, such as analyses for structures and energy and
               in-place cost codes for interfacing with a variety of other software tools.
                    BIM facilitates interactions between different design tools by improving
               the availability of information for those tools. It supports feedback from analy-
               ses and simulations into the design development process, and these changes
               will, in turn, affect the way designers think and the processes they undertake.
               BIM also facilitates the integration of construction and fabrication thinking
               into the building model, encouraging collaboration beyond what is involved
               with drawings. As a result, BIM will likely redistribute the time and effort
               designers spend in different phases of design.


                  Outline of traditional architectural services
                  Feasibility studies
                  Non-spatial quantitative and textual project specification, dealing primarily with cash flows, function
                  or income generation; associates areas and required equipment; includes initial cost estimation; may
                  overlap and iterate with pre-design; may overlap and iterate with production or economic planning.

                  Pre-design
                  Fixes space and functionality requirements, phasing and possible expansion requirements; site and
                  context issues; building code and zoning constraints; may also include updated cost estimation
                  based on added information.
                                                                                                                (Continued)




c05.indd 151                                                                                                               12/19/07 4:15:55 PM
          152 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers


               Outline of traditional architectural services (Continued)
               Schematic Design (SD)
               Preliminary project design with building plans, showing how the pre-design program is realized;
               massing model of building shape and early rendering of concept; identifies candidate materials
               and finishes; identifies all building subsystems by system type.

               Design Development (DD)
               Detailed floor plans including all major construction systems (walls, facades, floor and all systems:
               structural, foundation, lighting, mechanical, electrical, communication and safety, acoustic, etc.)
               with general details; materials and their finishes; site drainage, site systems and landscaping.

               Construction Detailing (CD)
               Detailed plans for demolition, site preparation, grading, specification of systems and materials;
               member and component sizing and connection specifications for various systems; test and
               acceptance criteria for major systems; all chaises, block-outs, and connections required for
               intersystem integration.

               Construction Review
               Coordination of details, reviews of layouts, material selection and review; changes as required
               when built conditions are not as expected, or due to errors.



                                           This chapter addresses how BIM influences the entire range of design
                                      activities, from the initial stages of project development, dealing with feasibility
                                      and concept design, to design development and construction detailing. In a
                                      narrow sense, it addresses building design services however this role is realized:
                                      carried out by autonomous architectural or engineering firms; as either part of
                                      a large integrated architecture/engineering (AE) firm or through a development
                                      corporation with internal design services. Within these varied organizational
                                      structures, a wide variety of contractual and organizational arrangements may
                                      be found. This chapter also introduces some of the new roles that will arise with
                                      this technology and considers the new needs and practices that BIM supports.



                                           5.2 SCOPE OF DESIGN SERVICES

                                      Design is the activity where a major part of the information about a project
                                      is initially defined and the documentation structure is laid out for information




c05.indd 152                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:15:55 PM
                                                                                                                5.2 Scope of Design Services    153

               added in later phases. A summary of the services provided within the traditional
               phases of design is shown in Figure 5-1. The traditional contract for architec-
               tural services suggests a payment schedule (and thus the distribution of effort)
               to be 15% for schematic design, 30% for design development, and 55% for
               construction documents (AIA 1994). This distribution reflects the weight tra-
               ditionally required for the production of construction drawings.
                    Due to its ability to automate standard forms of detailing, BIM significantly
               reduces the amount of time required for producing construction documents.
               Figure 5-1 illustrates the relationship between design effort and time, indicating
               how effort is traditionally distributed (line 3) and how it can be re-distributed
               as a result of BIM (line 4). This revision aligns effort more closely with the value
               of decisions made during the design and build process (line 1) and the growth
               in the cost of making changes within the project lifetime (line 2). The chart
               emphasizes the impact of early design decisions on the overall functionality,




                                                                                                                              FIGURE 5-1
                                                                                                                              Value added, cost
                                                                                                                              of changes and
                                        1                                                                       2             current compensation
                                                                                                                              distribution for design
                                                                                                                              services
                                                                                                                              (CURT 2007).




               Effort/Effect                  4




                                                          3




                                   PD         SD          DD               CD            PR     CA              OP
                                                                          Time
                               1    Ability to impact cost and functional capabilities   PD: Pre-design
                               2    Cost of design changes                               SD: Schematic design
                               3    Traditional design process                           DD: Design development
                               4    Preferred design process                             PR: Procurement
                                                                                         CA: Construction Administration
                                                                                         OP: Operation




c05.indd 153                                                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:15:56 PM
          154 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 costs and benefits of a building project. The fee structure in some projects is
                                 already changing to reflect the value of decisions made during schematic design
                                 and the decreased effort required for producing construction documents.

                                 5.2.1 The Concept of Information Development
                                 Various building projects begin at different levels of information develop-
                                 ment, including definition of the building’s function, style, and method of
                                 construction. At the low end of the information development spectrum are
                                 franchise buildings, including warehouses and roadside service stations,
                                 often called “big boxes,” and other buildings with well defined functional
                                 properties and fixed building character. With these, minimal information
                                 development is required, and the client often knows ahead of time what is
                                 going to be delivered. Knowledge of the expected outcome is prescribed,
                                 including design detailing, construction methods, and environmental per-
                                 formance analyses.
                                     At the other end of the spectrum—involving the highest level of informa-
                                 tion development—are owners interested in developing facilities for new social
                                 functions or attempting to re-think existing functions, such as combining an
                                 airport with a seaport, an undersea hotel, or a theater for experimental multi-
                                 media performances. Other instances of high information development involve
                                 agreements between the owner and designer to explore the application of non-
                                 standard materials, structural systems or environmental controls. Two of the
                                 case studies in Chapter 9—the Beijing Aquatic Center and the San Francisco
                                 Federal Building—are examples of high information development projects.
                                 Their respective functions led to the development of new and untried systems
                                 that were generated from first principle analyses. For some time, progressive
                                 architecture firms and students have expressed an interest in fabricating build-
                                 ings using non-standard materials and forms, following the inspiration of Frank
                                 Gehry, Sir Norman Foster, and others. These projects involve higher levels of
                                 information development in the short term, until such cladding or construction
                                 practices become part of the arsenal of standard and conventional practices.
                                     In practice, most buildings are functionally and stylistically a composition
                                 of well-understood social functions, with some variations in detail practices
                                 and procedures, styles and image. On the construction side, most architecture
                                 conforms to well-understood construction practices, with only occasional
                                 innovations regarding materials, fabrication and onsite assembly.
                                     The scope of design services, considered from the level of information
                                 development, can be simple or elaborate, depending on the needs and intention
                                 of the client as well as the level of sophistication within the project delivery
                                 team, as outlined above. Traditionally, the level of information development is
                                 conveyed in the scope of contracts that define architectural services, as outlined




c05.indd 154                                                                                                    12/19/07 4:15:56 PM
                                                                                       5.2 Scope of Design Services   155

                 Range of Technical Services Used During Design
                 • Financial and cash flow analyses
                 • Analysis of primary functions including services in hospitals, rest homes, airports, restaurants,
                   convention centers, parking garages, theater complexes, etc.
                 • Site planning, including parking, drainage, roadways
                 • Design and analysis/simulation of all building systems, including:
                    ❍   structure
                    ❍   mechanical and air handling systems
                    ❍   emergency alarm/control systems
                    ❍   lighting
                    ❍   acoustics
                    ❍   curtainwall systems
                    ❍   energy conservation and air quality
                    ❍   vertical circulation
                    ❍security
                 • Cost estimation
                 • Accessibility assessment
                 • Landscaping, fountains and planting
                 • External building cleaning and maintenance
                 • External lighting and signage



               in the box on pages 151 and 152 (“Outline of traditional architectural services”.)
               In projects with well-defined data for function and construction, the initial
               phase may be abbreviated or omitted, with design development (DD) and con-
               struction detailing (CD) being the main tasks. In other instances, feasibility,
               pre-design, and schematic design (SD) may be of critical importance, where
               the major costs and functional benefits are determined. With such projects,
               steeper fee structures are justified.

               5.2.2 Technical Collaborations
               Design services potentially involve a great range of technical issues, involving
               various building systems, different building types, and the specialty services
               required of them, such as equipment for laboratories or artificial materials used
               on the playing fields of stadiums. A sample of these typical services is summa-
               rized in the box titled “Range of Technical Services Used During Design” listed
               on this page. While some of the services listed in this box are carried out by the




c05.indd 155                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:15:57 PM
          156 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 primary design firm, more often, they are undertaken by external consultants.
                                 For example, in a study of collaborative architectural services (Eastman et al.
                                 1998) with the firm of John Portman and Associates in Atlanta, a large build-
                                 ing project in Shanghai was found to include over twenty-eight different types
                                 of consultants.
                                      From this overview, we can appreciate what is well-known by most large
                                 architectural firms but less understood by many clients, developers, contractors,
                                 and even small design firms—that building design is a broad and collaborative
                                 undertaking, involving a wide range of issues that require technical detailing
                                 and focused expertise. It is in this broad context that BIM must operate, by both
                                 enhancing quality and coordination. We can also see from the diversity of con-
                                 tributors for this book that the main challenge in adopting BIM technology is
                                 getting all parties of a design project to agree on new methods of working, and
                                 for documenting and communicating their work. In the end, everyone must
                                 adapt to the practices associated with this new way of doing business. This point
                                 is emphasized—implicitly and explicitly—in the case studies in Chapter 9.
                                      Today, an additional set of collaborators is frequently becoming involved in
                                 the early design stages. These are contractors and fabricators who are candidates
                                 for executing the project downstream, who form the basis of a design-build
                                 effort or other type of teaming arrangements. These experts address constructi-
                                 bility, procurement, scheduling and similar issues.



                                      5.3 BIM USE IN DESIGN PROCESSES

                                 The two technological foundations of Building Information Modeling reviewed
                                 in Chapters 2 and 3—parametric design tools and interoperability—offer many
                                 process improvements and information enhancements within traditional design
                                 practices. These benefits span all phases of design. Some of the potential uses
                                 and benefits of BIM have yet to be conceived, but several tracks of develop-
                                 ment have evolved far enough to demonstrate significant payoffs. Here, we
                                 consider the role and process of design from four of those viewpoints which
                                 apply in varying degrees to different projects, depending on their level of infor-
                                 mation development.
                                      The first viewpoint addresses conceptual design, as it is commonly con-
                                 ceived. This involves generating the basic building plan, its massing and general
                                 appearance, determining the building’s placement and orientation on the site,
                                 its structure and how the project will realize the basic building program. These
                                 are the typical and traditional unknowns of most building projects. BIM can
                                 have a huge impact in strengthening the quality of decisions made in this phase,




c05.indd 156                                                                                                    12/19/07 4:15:57 PM
                                                                                    5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   157

               based on quick feedback. These initial decisions can be much better informed
               regarding such aspects as the building program, construction and operating
               cost constraints, and increasingly, environmental considerations.
                    A second viewpoint addresses the use of BIM for design and analysis of
               building systems. Analysis in this respect may be thought of as operations to
               measure the fluctuations of physical parameters that can be expected in the
               real building. Analysis covers many functional aspects of a building’s perform-
               ance, such as structural integrity, temperature control, ventilation, lighting,
               circulation, acoustics, energy distribution and consumption, water supply and
               waste disposal, all under varied use or external loads. This viewpoint concerns
               collaboration with the various professions involved supported by integration
               of the analysis software those professions utilize. They in turn produce the
               design layouts that are used to plan and coordinate the various systems. In
               exceptional cases involving high-level information development, the early
               design process can involve experimental analyses of structure, environmental
               controls, construction methods, use of new materials or systems, detailed anal-
               yses of user processes, or other technical aspects of a building project. There
               isn’t one set of problems in need of analysis. This last viewpoint demands
               intense collaboration among a team of specialists, requiring a mix of configura-
               ble tools that, when combined, form a design workbench.
                    The third viewpoint is the conventional BIM viewpoint of its use in devel-
               oping construction-level information. Building modeling software includes
               placement and composition rules that can expedite the generation of standard
               or pre-defined construction documentation. This provides the option of both
               speeding up the process and enhancing quality. Construction modeling is a basic
               strength of current BIM authoring tools. Today, the primary product of this
               phase is construction documents. But this is changing. In the future, the build-
               ing model itself will serve as the legal basis for construction documentation.
                    The fourth and last viewpoint involves design and construction
               integration. At the more obvious level, this view applies to well-integrated
               design-build processes in conventional construction, facilitating fast, effi-
               cient construction of the building after design, or indeed in parallel with it.
               It emphasizes the growing use of a building model for direct use in construc-
               tion and generating initial input for fabrication-level modeling. In its more
               ambitious aspect, this view involves working out non-standard fabrication
               procedures, working from carefully developed detailed design models sup-
               porting ‘design for fabrication.’
                    In the sections that follow, these viewpoints are described in greater detail.
               In lieu of the milestones in traditional design contracts, we consider these four
               broad areas with an understanding of the fluidity of changes inherent in current




c05.indd 157                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:15:58 PM
          158 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 design development sequences. We also address a number of practical issues:
                                 model-based drawing and document preparation; development and management
                                 of libraries; integration of specifications and details for cost estimation. The
                                 chapter concludes with some practical issues of design practice: selecting a BIM
                                 authoring tool, training and introduction into projects, and issues of staffing.

                                 5.3.1 Concept Design and Preliminary Analyses
                                 As the previous sections indicated, major decisions regarding the value, per-
                                 formance and costs of a building are made during concept design. Thus the
                                 potential benefits that design firms can offer to clients will increasingly focus
                                 on the differentiating services they can offer within the concept design
                                 phase. Concept design based on early analysis feedback is especially impor-
                                 tant for projects involving medium or high levels of information development.
                                 We expect this to become an increasingly important area of design firm
                                 differentiation.
                                      Today, a growing number of easy-to-use tools are available that were con-
                                 ceived not for heavy-duty production design but as light-weight, intuitive tools
                                 that are relatively easy to use, so much so, that they become invisible aspects of
                                 the designer’s thinking process. Each provides functionality that is important
                                 for preliminary design. Some tools focus on quick 3D sketching and form gen-
                                 eration, such as Google SketchUp® (Google 2007), or for larger and more
                                 geometrically complex projects, form·Z. Other software programs support lay-
                                 out according to a building program, such as Facility Composer and Trelligence
                                 (Trelligence 2007) or simple layouts and interfaces for energy, lighting, and
                                 other forms of analysis relevant to conceptual designs, such as EcoTect (Square
                                 One Research 2007), IES and Green Building Studio. Another important area
                                 for conceptual design is cost assessment, which is offered by Dprofiler (Beck
                                 Technology 2007) plus others. Unfortunately, no one of these programs pro-
                                 vides the broad spectrum of functionality needed for general concept design,
                                 and smooth interoperability between these tools is not yet a reality. In practice,
                                 most users rely on one of the aforementioned software tools. Of these, few are
                                 able to interface easily and efficiently with existing BIM authoring tools. A
                                 quick review of these various secondary tools follows.

                                 3D Sketching Tools
                                 The earliest available conceptual design tools were those for 3D sketching.
                                 form·Z can be considered the grandparent of this category, having served as a
                                 3D design tool since 1989. It supports powerful 3D solid and surface modeling
                                 capabilities that can represent any form imaginable, for architects and product
                                 designers. In its early days, it was considered the most intuitive solid modeler




c05.indd 158                                                                                                    12/19/07 4:15:58 PM
                                                                                 5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   159

               available, but with growth in functionality and new competitors, form·Z is a
               trade-off between powerful freeform surface modeling and intuitiveness. An
               example project developed using form·Z, for a high speed train station in
               Pusan, Korea, is shown in Figure 5-2. Other products with similar functionality
               include Rhino and Maxon, which also emphasize freeform capabilities.

                                                                                                   FIGURE 5-2
                                                                                                   Competition models
                                                                                                   using form·Z.
                                                                                                   Courtesy of View by
                                                                                                   View, San Francisco.




c05.indd 159                                                                                                        12/19/07 4:15:58 PM
          160 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                        Other applications focus on the quick sketch 3D layout of building spaces
                                   and envelopes. Products of this type include SketchUp® and the now defunct
                                   Architectural Studio® from Autodesk. These tools support quick generation of
                                   schematic designs and rendering in a manner conveying the character of the
                                   proposed space and building shell. An example project and multiple views
                                   generated in SketchUp are shown in Figure 5-3.
                                        These applications support easy sketch definitions of the geometric forms
                                   used in architecture but typically do not carry object types or properties other
                                   than material color and/or transparency, which are only useful for rendering.
                                   As a result, they do not interoperate well with other concept design tools, such
                                   as those described below.

                                   Space Planning
                                   A building’s requirements often center on a set of spatial needs defined by the
                                   program, describing the number and types of spaces that the client expects,
                                   their respective square footages, the environmental services they require, and
                                   in some cases the materials and surfaces desired. Critical relations between
                                   these spaces are further detailed according to organizational practices; for
                                   example, access required between different wards and treatment facilities
                                   within a hospital.
                                        Space planning involves organizing the spatial needs defined by the client
                                   and expanding them to include storage, support, mechanical, and other ancil-
                                   lary spaces. Typically, these applications depict the space program in two forms,
                                   as a series of line items on a spreadsheet and as a block diagram layout of the
                                   proposed floor plan. Software products that incorporate this functionality


          FIGURE 5-3
          A massing design study
          done in SketchUp.




c05.indd 160                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:02 PM
                                                                                5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes    161

               include Visio Space Planner®, Vectorworks® Space Planning Tool, Trelligence®,
               and the Army Corps of Engineers’ Facility Composer. Autodesk Revit® and
               ArchiCAD®’s links with Trelligence provide similar spreadsheet capabilities
               within these BIM design tools. A composite of three screen shots from Facility
               Composer is shown in Figure 5-4. The figure shows the program spreadsheet
               of space types, indicating what has been laid out (actual) and what remains to
               be allocated (available) by building and by story. A plan of one story and the
               schematic massing of the entire building are also shown in Figure 5-4.
                   These applications explicitly represent the spaces within a building, with
               or without development of space enclosures. A spreadsheet shows the current
               layout allocation in relation to the space program requirements. All current
               space planning programs support massing based on a blank sheet of paper,
               without envelope constraints; thus none appear to support generation of
               layouts within the confines of a given building shell, or within a form that
               captures a target image. These tools provide another set of important but
               incomplete schematic design capabilities.



                                                                                                  FIGURE 5-4
                                                                                                  Like most space
                                                                                                  planning systems,
                                                                                                  Facility Composer
                                                                                                  supports development
                                                                                                  of massing diagrams
                                                                                                  based on a program
                                                                                                  spreadsheet and
                                                                                                  compares the current
                                                                                                  layout in relation to the
                                                                                                  given program.




c05.indd 161                                                                                                        12/19/07 4:16:04 PM
          162 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                       Environmental Analysis
                                       The third type of application and interface focuses on energy and environmental
                                       aspects of a candidate design. IES Virtual Building®, Ecotect® and Green Build-
                                       ing Studio are three products in this area. Some images from Ecotect, providing
                                       performance feedback to the building model, are shown in Figure 5-5. These
                                       products operate through a mixture of a simplified building model and also
                                       with direct translators to existing analysis/simulation applications. Ecotect
                                       and IES have their own building model with form generation and editing
                                       capabilities and have some of the functionality of sketching applications.
                                            With drawing systems, the preparation of datasets to run an application
                                       was so cumbersome, that if applied at all, they were relegated to the later
                                       stages of design. With BIM, the interfaces to applications can be automated,
                                       allowing almost real-time feedback on design actions. These environmental
                                       analysis applications incorporate interfaces to a set of energy, artificial and
                                       natural lighting analyses, fire egress and other assessment applications, allow-
                                       ing quick analysis of schematic-level designs. gbXML provides an interface
                                       from existing BIM design tools to its set of analysis applications. The different
                                       interfaces supported by Ecotect, IES and gbXML are shown in Table 5-1.
                                            These environmental analysis tools offer insight into the behaviors associ-
                                       ated with a given design, and provide an early assessment of gross energy, light-
                                       ing use, as well as estimated operating costs. Until now, such performances relied
                                       mainly on designer experience and rules of thumb. These application suites offer




          FIGURE 5-5
          Images from Ecotect,
          showing A) solar heat
          gain between buildings,
          B) computational fluid
          dynamics of thermal
          flows within a building,
          C) sunlight inside a
          building and
          D) acoustics analysis.
          (See color insert for full
          color picture).




c05.indd 162                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:16:05 PM
                                                                                                5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   163

               Table 5-1     Analyses supported from application suite’s building model.
                Ecotect - own building model plus IFC input

                DAYSIM                   lighting simulator
                Radiance                 lighting simulator
                CIBSE                    energy analysis
                Energy+                  energy analysis
                                         solar radiation analysis
                                         reverberation time acoustic analysis
                NIST-FDS, Fluent         general interface for multiple computational fluid dynamic
                and WinAir4              analyses

                IES – own building model plus direct link with Autodesk Revit®

                ApacheCalc               heat loss and gain
                ApacheLoads              heating and cooling loads
                ApacheSim                dynamic thermal simulation
                ApacheHVAC               HVAC plant simulation
                SunCast                  sun shading
                MacroFlo                 simulates natural ventilation and mixed mode systems
                MicroFlo                 interior computational fluid dynamics application
                Deft                     value engineering
                CostPlan                 capital cost estimates
                LifeCycle                estimates lifetime operating costs
                IndusPro                 ductwork layout and sizing
                PiscesPro                pipework systems
                Simulex                  building evacuation
                Lisi                     elevator simulation

                gbXML – XML link from Autodesk Revit®, Bentley Architecture and ArchiCAD®

                DOE-2                    energy simulation
                Energy+                  energy simulation
                Trane2000                equipment simulation
                                         building product information




               only limited compatibility with existing BIM design tools (as reviewed in Chap-
               ter 2). In this regard, gbXML export interfaces are available within ArchiCAD®,
               Bentley Architect and Revit®. Ecotect has IFC interfaces with ArchiCAD® and
               Digital Project. IES has a direct interface with Revit®.
                    Environmental analysis tools also require significant amounts of non-
               project specific information, including details that may affect incident sunlight




c05.indd 163                                                                                                                      12/19/07 4:16:09 PM
          164 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                            and any objects or effects that may restrict sunlight or views of existing structures,
                                            such as geographic location, climatic conditions, structures, or topography. This
                                            information is not typically carried within BIM design tools but by secondary
                                            analysis tools. These distributed datasets often introduce management-level
                                            problems, such as determining which analysis run gave which results and based
                                            on which version of the design. In this respect, repositories can play an impor-
                                            tant role (see Chapter 3).
                                                More broadly, the exchange formats supported by all existing conceptual
                                            design tools are shown in Table 5-2. At the moment, most of the information gen-
                                            erated by these tools must be regenerated in the transfer to a BIM authoring tool.


          Table 5-2      Concept design applications and the exchange formats they support.
                                                Import formats                                                      Export formats



                                                                   G E S                                                                    G E S
                                        D W G            V R M L                                            D W G                 V R M L
                               D S                                         A T                                                                      A T
                                                 D X F
                                                                                                  D S
                                                                                                                      D X F
                               3                                           S                      3                                                 S
           Application
                                                                   I               Others                                                   I                   Others

           Massing and Sketching

           SketchUp                 •       •        •                                                  •       •             •         •                 obj, Epix
           form.Z                   •       •        •         •       •         act, obj,              •       •             •         •       •     •   act, Epix,
                                                                                 rib, w3d,                                                                ArtL, obj, rib,
                                                                                 stp, stl,                                                                w3d, stp,
                                                                                 3dmf                                                                     stl, 3dm
           Rhino                    •       •        •                 •         obj, stp, stl,         •       •             •         •       •     •   3dm, stp,
                                                                                 3dm                                                                      obj, x_t, stl,
                                                                                                                                                          xgl
           Maxon                    •                •         •                 direct3d,              •                     •         •                 direct 3d,
                                                                                 stl, cct                                                                 stl, cct

           Space Planning
           MS Visio                         •        •                           wmf, xls                                                                 xls
           Vectorworks              •       •        •         •       •     •                                                                  •     •   stl, epix
           Facility Composer                                           •         IFC, stp                                                       •         IFC, stp
           Trelligence                                                                                          •             •                           gml, csv

           Environmental Analysis
           IES                              •        •                           dgn,                                                                     Revit®
                                                                                 gbXML,
                                                                                 Revit®
           Ecotect                                   •                           IFC                                          •         •
           GreenBuilding                    •                                    rvt, dgn,                                              •
           Studio                                                                XML




c05.indd 164                                                                                                                                                             12/19/07 4:16:09 PM
                                                                                   5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   165

               Other Issues of Conceptual Design
               For completing what has traditionally been schematic design, two other
               aspects of a design must also be defined: site development (including existing
               conditions) and typological identification of all building systems. Site develop-
               ment involves building placement, elevation, definition of all major site and
               ground contour changes and enhancements, and the general scope of site
               development. Use of the site is often an important aspect of an overall
               conceptual design. Some BIM design tools support site planning, as listed in
               Table 2-1, and some environmental analysis tools support site as well as exte-
               rior solar and wind studies. To our knowledge, outside space functions can
               currently be dealt with in space planning tools using block spaces to make site
               layout allocations.
                    Conceptual design usually involves identifying the ‘type’ for each of the
               building systems, including structural, exterior envelope, energy and HVAC,
               lighting, and vertical circulation. This information is needed for generating ini-
               tial cost estimates at an early stage; verifying that the project is within eco-
               nomic scope and satisfying the program. Most existing environmental analysis
               applications identify HVAC system types but not structural or other systems.
                    Traditionally, cost estimation for small projects at the conceptual stage
               involved ‘back-of-envelope’ calculations based on a single gross unit measure,
               such as square footage or the number of rooms. Validation of the proposed
               design concept for larger projects usually involves a detailed cost estimate
               prepared by a consultant. With the proper setup, BIM supports rapid
               generation of cost estimates, so it is now practical to undertake cost esti-
               mates throughout the concept exploration and development process. While at
               this level of design development only rough estimates of construction cost can
               be generated, the information provided can inform the designer of potential
               issues early, or alternatively provide confidence that the proposed design can
               be developed within range of the project’s budget. The issues associated with
               generating almost real-time cost estimates are reviewed in Sections 5.3.2
               and 6.6.
                    The only software currently available for representing all building systems
               and supporting concept-level cost estimation is DProfiler, which enables rapid
               composition of a concept model and generation of a cost estimate. It can only
               be used for certain predefined building types. Like the energy-related concept
               tools, the DProfiler building model is distinct and supports only DXF/DWG
               export to other applications, such as the concept design tools listed above or
               the BIM design tools. DProfiler is described more fully in the Hillwood Com-
               mercial Project case study in Chapter 9.
                    Another aspect of understanding the building context is in capturing
               as-built conditions. This is a critical issue for retrofit work and remodeling.




c05.indd 165                                                                                                         12/19/07 4:16:10 PM
          166 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 New surveying techniques, based on laser scanning with point clouds, offer a
                                 valuable new technique to capture as-built conditions. These are discussed in
                                 Chapter 8.

                                 Concept Design Summary
                                 Concept design tools must balance the need to support the intuitive and creative
                                 thinking process when a basic design scheme is first being defined and explored
                                 with the ability to provide fast assessment and feedback based on a variety of
                                 simulation and analysis tools, allowing more informed design. Unfortunately,
                                 each of these tools only does part of the overall task, requiring translation
                                 between them and later with the major BIM tools discussed in Chapter 2.
                                      None of the tools available today support the full scope of conceptual
                                 design services. They require users to either gain and maintain competency in
                                 a number of different software programs, each with different user interfaces,
                                 or fill the gaps by relying on manual paper-based modes of assessment (or
                                 more likely, intuition). Data exchange and workflows between these applica-
                                 tions are also limited, as shown in Table 5-2. In large firms, the various tasks
                                 associated with schematic design (and their supporting applications) may be
                                 split among multiple people using custom API-based interfaces. Small firms
                                 are likely to select one of these tools and forgo the benefits of using multiple,
                                 due to the costs of developing custom workflows between them.
                                      Toward the end of the schematic design phase, output from these applica-
                                 tions must be transferred to a general BIM design tool. Ideally, such an exchange
                                 would be easy and two-way, allowing for simple analyses or complex form-
                                 generations to be revised and re-evaluated. But as noted earlier, even in the
                                 primary direction this transfer is not yet well-supported by existing BIM tools.
                                      How could these diverse conceptual design applications be integrated?
                                 There are at least four ways to integrate the different functionality needed for
                                 schematic design, as reviewed here: (1) a single application is developed that
                                 covers all the functionality; this has not yet happened; (2) a suite of integrated
                                 applications could be developed based on a business plan that is mutually ben-
                                 eficial to various companies, using a set of direct translators or plug-ins; this
                                 also has not happened, but some such arrangements exist; (3) the applications
                                 support a neutral public standard exchange interface (such as IFC) and rely on
                                 it to support integration; this has begun, as in the case of Ecotect; (4) the easier-
                                 to-use BIM authoring tools expand their capabilities, such as Revit® or
                                 ArchiCAD®, to include the functionality reviewed here. All but the first of these
                                 integration efforts are being applied in varying degrees.
                                      To summarize, while the front-end services associated with conceptual
                                 design are likely to become increasingly important as BIM is adopted, the current




c05.indd 166                                                                                                       12/19/07 4:16:10 PM
                                                                                    5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   167

               technology base is not yet in place to support such a change. Existing conceptual
               design tools provide only very limited solutions. On the other hand, BIM model
               creation tools are generally too complex to be used for sketching and form-
               generation. Paper and pencil remain the dominant tools for such work. In the
               near future, the authors anticipate evolutionary progress in this area, with effec-
               tive concept design systems solutions emerging soon.

               5.3.2 Building System Design and Analysis/Simulation
               As design proceeds past the conceptual stage, systems require detailed specifica-
               tion. Mechanical systems need sizing, and structural systems must be engineered.
               These tasks are usually undertaken through collaboration with engineering
               specialists, internal or external to the design organization. Like concept design,
               effective collaboration among these activities provides an area of market
               differentiation.
                    In this section, we review the general issues associated with applying
               analysis and simulation methods to design. First, we focus on the use of
               such applications as part of the normal performance assessment process
               during the detailing of building systems in the later stages of design. In con-
               trast to the earlier applications, the applications in this phase are complex
               and usually operated by technical domain specialists. We consider areas of
               application and existing software alternatives: some of the issues concern-
               ing their use and exchange; and integration methods and general concerns
               relating to collaboration. We conclude by examining the special use of anal-
               ysis and simulation models that explore innovative applications of new
               technologies, materials, controls, or other systems to buildings. It is impor-
               tant to note that such experimental architecture generally requires special-
               ized tools and configurations.

               Analysis/Simulation Software
               As design development proceeds, details concerning the building’s various sys-
               tems must be determined in order to validate earlier estimates and to specify
               the systems for bidding, fabrication, and installation. This detailing involves a
               wide range of technical information.
                    All buildings must satisfy structural, environmental conditioning, fresh
               water distribution and waste water removal, fire retardance, electrical or other
               power distribution, communications and other basic functions. While each of
               these capabilities and the systems required to support them may have been
               identified earlier, their specification for conformance to codes, certifications
               and client objectives require more detailed definition. In addition, the spaces
               in a building are also systems circulation and access, systems of organizational




c05.indd 167                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:16:10 PM
          168 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 functions supported by the spatial configuration. Tools for analyses of these
                                 systems are also coming into use.
                                     In simple projects, the need for specialized knowledge with respect to
                                 these systems may be addressed by the lead members of a design team, but in
                                 more complex facilities, they are usually handled by specialists who are located
                                 either within the firm or hired as consultants on a per-project basis.
                                     Over the past two decades, a great many computerized analysis capabilities
                                 were developed, long before the emergence of BIM. One large set of these is
                                 based on building physics. With drafting (electronic or manual), significant
                                 effort was required to prepare a dataset needed to run these analyses. With auto-
                                 mated interfaces, a more collaborative workflow is possible, allowing multiple
                                 experts from different domains to work together to generate the final design.
                                     An effective interface between a BIM authoring tool and an analysis/
                                 simulation application involves at least three aspects:


                                    (1) Assignment of specific attributes and relations in the BIM authoring
                                        tool consistent with those required for the analysis.
                                    (2) Methods for compiling an analytical data model that contains appro-
                                        priate abstractions of building geometry for it to function as a valid
                                        and accurate representation of the building for the specified analysis
                                        software. The analytical model that is abstracted from the physical BIM
                                        model will be different for each type of analysis.
                                    (3) A mutually supported exchange format for data transfers. Such trans-
                                        fers must maintain associations between the abstracted analysis model
                                        and the physical BIM model and include ID information to support
                                        incremental updating on both sides of the exchange.


                                      These aspects are at the core of BIM’s fundamental promise to do away
                                 with the need for multiple data entry for different analysis applications, allow-
                                 ing the model to be analyzed directly and within very short cycle times. Almost
                                 all existing building analysis software tools require extensive preprocessing of
                                 the model geometry, defining material properties and applying loads. Where
                                 BIM tools incorporate these three capabilities, the geometry can be derived
                                 directly from the common model, material properties can be assigned auto-
                                 matically for each analysis and the loading conditions for an analysis can be
                                 stored, edited and applied.
                                      The way in which structural analyses are handled illustrates these aspects
                                 well. Because architectural design applications do not generate or represent
                                 structural members in a way that is suitable for performing structural analyses,




c05.indd 168                                                                                                   12/19/07 4:16:11 PM
                                                                                       5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   169

               some software companies offer separate versions of their BIM software to provide
               these capabilities. Revit® Structures and Bentley Structures are two examples
               that provide the basic objects and relationships commonly used by structural
               engineers—such as columns, beams, walls, slabs, etc.—in forms that are fully
               interoperable with the same objects in their sibling architectural BIM applica-
               tions. It is important to note, however, that they carry a dual representation, add-
               ing an idealized ‘stick-and-node’ representation of the structure. They are also
               capable of representing structural loads and load combinations and the abstract
               behavior of connections, as connection releases, as are needed for analyses used
               to gain building code approval. These capabilities provide engineers with direct
               interfaces for running structural analysis applications. Figure 9.8-2 in the Penn
               National case study (Chapter 9) shows a model of a shear wall in a BIM tool and
               the results of an in-plane lateral load analysis of that wall.
                    Energy analysis has its own special requirements: one dataset set for rep-
               resenting the external shell for solar radiation; a second set for representing the
               internal zones and heat generation usages; and a third set for representing
               the HVAC mechanical plant. Additional data preparation by the user, usually
               an energy specialist, is required. By default, only the first of these sets are rep-
               resented in a typical BIM design tool.
                    Lighting simulation, acoustic analysis, and air flow simulations based
               on computational fluid dynamics (CFD) each have their own particular data
               needs. While issues related to generating input datasets for structural analysis
               are well understood and most designers are experienced with lighting simula-
               tions (through the use of rendering packages), the input needs for conducting
               other kinds of analyses are less understood and require significant setup and
               expertise.
                    Providing the interfaces for preparing such specialized datasets is an essential
               contribution of the special-purpose environmental analysis building models
               reviewed in Section 5.3.1. It is likely that a suite of preparation tools for perform-
               ing detailed analyses will emerge embedded within future versions of primary BIM
               design tools. These embedded interfaces will facilitate checking and data prepara-
               tion for each individual application, as has been done for preliminary design. A
               properly implemented analysis filter will: (1) check that the minimum data is avail-
               able geometrically from the BIM model; (2) abstract the requisite geometry from
               the model; (3) assign the necessary material or object attributes; and (4) request
               changes to the parameters needed for the analysis from the user.
                    The commonly used analysis/simulation applications for detailed design
               are shown in Table 5-3. Both public data exchange formats and direct, propri-
               etary links with specific BIM design tools are listed. The direct links are built
               using middleware public software interface standards, such as ODBC or COM,




c05.indd 169                                                                                                             12/19/07 4:16:11 PM
          170 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

          Table 5-3 Some of the common analysis/simulation applications and their exchange capabilities.
                                                             Import Formats                           Export Formats
                                                       2                                              2

                                                                                              X M L

                                                                            S D N F                                         S D N F
                                                       /            /                                 /


                                                                                                            I F C
                                                              F C
                                                                                      S A T
                                                                                                      S

                                                                                                                    D X F
                                                       S

                                                                    D X F
                                                                                               B

                                        Application    C I                                            C I
                                                              I                                G                                       Direct Links
               Structural Analysis    SAP200,ETABS     •      •                                        •     •                        Revit®
                                                                                                                                      Structures

                                      STAAD-Pro        •                                               •                              Tekla Struc-
                                                                                                                                      tures, Bentley

                                      RISA                           •                                               •       •        Revit®
                                                                                                                                      Structures

                                      GT-STRUDL        •                     •                         •

                                      RAM                                                              •             •       •        Revit®
                                                                                                                                      Structures

                                      Robobat          •      •                                                                       Revit®
                                                                                                                                      Structures

               Energy Analysis        DOE-2

                                      EnergyPlus              •                                •             •       •                Ecotect

                                      Apache                         •                                                                IES

                                      ESP-r                          •                                               •                Ecotect

               Mechanical Equipment   TRNSYS
               Simulation
                                      Carrier E20-II

               Lighting Analysis/     Radiance                       •                         •                                      ArchiCAD®
               Simulation

               Acoustic Analysis      Ease                           •

                                      Odeon                          •

               Air Flow/CFD           Flovent                        •                 •

                                      Fluent

                                      MicroFlo                                                                                        IES

               Building Function      EDM Model               •
               Analysis               Checker

                                      Solibri                 •




c05.indd 170                                                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:12 PM
                                                                                   5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   171

               or proprietary interfaces, such as ArchiCAD®’s GDL or Bentley’s MDL. These
               exchanges make portions of the building model accessible for application
               development.
                    CIS/2, which is the most commonly used public data exchange format, is
               the result of intense development effort by the structural steel industry (see
               Chapter 3 for details). It provides extensive exchange coverage for structural
               analysis applications but only for steel structures. Efforts have been under-
               taken to make the IFC schema supportive of structural analysis, and to a lesser
               degree, energy analyses. Initial work has been done to enable IFC models to
               carry annual solar radiation gains, but not lighting, acoustic, or airflow simula-
               tions. Such tailoring of the IFC model can be expected as BIM technology
               becomes more widely adopted.
                    A uniform direct exchange format to support all analysis types is not likely
               to be developed, because different analyses require different abstractions from
               the physical model, with properties that are specific to each analysis type. Most
               analyses require careful structuring of the input data by the designer or the
               engineer who prepares the model.
                    The above review focuses on quantitative analysis dealing with the physi-
               cal behavior of buildings. Less complex but still complicated criteria must
               also be assessed, such as fire safety and access for the disabled. Recently, the
               availability of neutral format (IFC) building models has facilitated two prod-
               ucts supporting rule-based model checking. Solibri considers itself to be a
               spell and grammar checking tool for building models. EDM ModelChecker™
               provides a platform for undertaking large-scale building code checking and
               other forms of complex configuration assessments. EDM is the platform used
               in CORENET, the Singapore automated building code checking effort
               (CORENET 2007). A similar building code effort is underway in Australia
               (Ding et al. 2006).
                    Solibri (Solibri 2007) has implemented the Space Program Validation
               application for GSA (GSA 2006) and is in the process of developing additional
               testing for circulation layout. One aspect of Space Program Validation for the
               area derivation of one space is shown in Figure 5-6. The application compares
               the program areas against the ones in the layout, based on the ANSI-BOMA
               area calculation method, to determine compliance with the space program.
               Such assessment applications dealing with both qualitative and quantitative
               assessments will become more widely used as standard representations become
               more available.
                    Some BIM design tools also provide space programming assessment capa-
               bilities. Revit® has a space planning assessment capability, and ArchiCAD® has
               a plug-in of Trelligence Affinity™ that offers similar capabilities.




c05.indd 171                                                                                                         12/19/07 4:16:13 PM
          172 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

          FIGURE 5-6
          Example derivation of
          the ANSI-BOMA space
          area, for comparison
          with the specified
          program area.
          Image provided
          courtesy of the Office
          of the Chief Architect,
          Public Buildings Service,
          U.S. General Services
          Administration.




                                      Improving Organizational Performances within Facilities
                                      While the performance of a building shell is obvious and directly tied to design
                                      and construction, buildings are also built to house various healthcare, business,
                                      transportation education or other functions. The constructed space can contrib-
                                      ute to the efficient functioning of the operations carried out within the building.
                                      These are obvious in manufacturing facilities, where the layout of operations is
                                      well understood to have an effect on efficient production. The same logic
                                      has been applied to hospitals, based on the recognition that doctors and nurses
                                      spend a significant time each day walking. More recently, issues of developing
                                      space layouts that can support varied emergency procedures in trauma units
                                      and intensive care facilities have also been studied.
                                           The processing time in airports is something we all face and can be
                                      affected by airport planning. As the workforce becomes more oriented
                                      toward creative production, the open, friendly work environments found in
                                      Silicon Valley will become more commonplace everywhere. The increasing
                                      percentage of GDP devoted to healthcare indicates that improvements that
                                      can be generated through improved design—associated with new proce-
                                      dures— are an area worthy of intense analysis and study. Whether architects
                                      take up such analytical capabilities, clearly, the integration of building designs
                                      with models of organizational processes, human circulation behavior, and




c05.indd 172                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:16:13 PM
                                                                                    5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   173

               other related phenomena will become an important aspect of design
               analysis.
                   These issues are generally driven by owner recognition of need, and are
               discussed in Section 4.5.7. Motivation for such studies being undertaken as
               specialized design services is addressed in Section 5.4.1.

               Cost Estimation
               While analysis and simulation programs attempt to predict various types of
               building behavior, cost estimation involves a different kind of analysis and pre-
               diction. Like the previous analyses, it needs to be applicable at different levels
               of design development, taking advantage of the information available and mak-
               ing normative assumptions regarding what is missing. Because cost estimation
               addresses issues relevant to the owner, contractor, and fabricator, it is also dis-
               cussed from these varying perspectives in Chapters 4, 6, and 7 respectively.
                    Until recently, the product or material units for a project were measured
               and estimated through manual counting and area calculations. Like all human
               activities, these involved errors and took time. However, building information
               models now have distinct objects that can be easily counted, and along with
               volumes and areas of materials, can be automatically computed, almost instan-
               taneously. The specified data extracted from a BIM design tool can thus provide
               an accurate count of the building product and material units needed for cost
               estimation. The Jackson Mississippi Federal Courthouse case study (Chapter 9)
               provides tables indicating the variations generated by different firms producing
               manual bills of materials for concrete foundations, as a component of the over-
               all cost estimate. A fuller review of cost estimating systems is provided in Sec-
               tion 6.6.
                    Cost estimation integrated with a BIM design tool allows designers to carry
               out value engineering while they are designing, considering alternatives as they
               design that make best use of the client’s resources. Following traditional prac-
               tices and removing cost items at the end of a project, when ease of making
               changes is the criterion rather than the most effective changes, usually leads to
               poor results. Incremental value engineering while the project is being devel-
               oped allows practical assessment throughout design.

               Collaboration
               Throughout design, collaborative work is undertaken between the design team
               and engineering and technical specialist consultants. This consultative work
               involves providing the appropriate project information regarding the design,
               its use and context to the specialists to review, and gaining feedback/advice/
               changes. The collaboration often involves team problem-solving, where each




c05.indd 173                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:16:14 PM
          174 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 participant only understands part of the overall problem. Traditionally, these
                                 collaborations have relied on drawings, faxes, telephone calls and physical
                                 meetings. The move to electronic documents and drawings offers new options
                                 for electronic transfer, email exchanges and Web conferencing with online
                                 model and drawing reviews.
                                      Most major BIM systems include support for model and drawing review
                                 and online markups. New tools display 3D building models or 2D drawings
                                 for review, without the complexity of full model generation capabilities. These
                                 view-only applications rely on formats similar to external reference files used
                                 in drafting systems, but are quickly becoming more powerful. A sharable build-
                                 ing model in a neutral format, such as VRML, IFC, DWF or Adobe®3D, is easy
                                 to generate, compact for easy transmission, allows mark-ups and revisions, and
                                 enables collaboration via Web conferences. Some of these model viewers
                                 include controls for managing which objects are visible and for examining
                                 object properties. In the near future, clients will demand take away copies of
                                 such models for extended personal review and assessment.
                                      It is important to recognize, if only in retrospect, the difficulty inherent in
                                 reading and understanding 2D sections and details. Comparatively, most
                                 everyone is able to read and understand a 3D model, which allows for a more
                                 inclusive and intuitive planning and review process. This is particularly impor-
                                 tant for clients that lack the experience needed for interpretatiing 2D drawings.
                                 Regular reviews with all of the parties involved in a design or construction
                                 project can be undertaken using 3D BIM models along with tools like Webex®,
                                 GoToMeeting® or Microsoft’s Live Meeting®. Conference participants may be
                                 distributed worldwide and are limited only by work/sleep patterns and time-
                                 zone differences. With voice and desktop image sharing tools—in addition to
                                 the ability to share building models—many issues of coordination and collabo-
                                 ration can be resolved.
                                      Collaboration takes place minimally at two levels: first among the parties
                                 involved, using web meeting and desktop displays like those described above.
                                 The other level involves project information sharing. In addition, the opportu-
                                 nity of close collaboration between consultants requires definition of data
                                 exchange structures that are able to support that collaboration and maintain
                                 consistency between models as design revisions are made. To explain the idea,
                                 we consider the case of structural analysis, based on the description of the
                                 tools and exchange formats presented earlier. This example can be extended to
                                 other types of shared design information.
                                      Once the building model’s system is ready for analysis and a data exchange
                                 format is available, a data exchange can be initiated. As reviewed in Chapter 3,
                                 workflows can be articulated to a fine-grained set of information exchanges




c05.indd 174                                                                                                      12/19/07 4:16:14 PM
                                                                                                 5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   175

               and dialogues. At the basic level, the exchange formats can be reduced to two
               types:

                    1) As a one-way flow from the BIM design tool to the analysis application.
               This flow is diagrammed in Figure 5-7. The designer passes the existing struc-
               tural network and its loads (if known) and any constraints regarding sections
               to the structural designer. The structural designer adds assumptions about con-
               nections, load conditions and other structural behavior. Based on initial analysis
               results, the structural engineer may try different alternatives, and then propose
               changes back to the designer. The return is made externally through drawings
               and sketches, and all updates are entered manually by the designer in the BIM
               tool. These changes may involve location changes, member size changes,
               detailed bracing layouts, and other design aspects that were not initially
               addressed. Because such changes are often detailed and tedious, they may
               be easily misinterpreted. Later updates of the structure are reanalyzed using the
               same process, with the engineer inserting the analysis assumptions each time in
               a new analysis run.
                    2) As a two-way flow, where the design application supports flow both to
               the analysis tool and also accepts results back. Here, the flow to the structural
               engineer is the same as before. After the analysis and needed iterations, the
               analyst passes proposed changes back to the BIM design application digitally.
               The system automatically presents these as model changes which the designer
               can accept or reject. This requires that the design application can detect the
               updated members and their properties, match them to the initial dataset and




                    BIM design tool                               Analysis Package                                 FIGURE 5-7
                  (designer/engineer)                           (structural engineer)                              Analysis information
                                                                                                                   flows based on a
                                            manual updating                                                        one-way flow into the
                                                                  Perform Analysis
                    Merge changes                                                                                  analysis package.



                                               Abstracted
                                               geometry -                                   load cases and
                    Model building                               Enter analysis data
                                              whole project                                 use context




                        object                                   site and   connection
                      properties                              environmental behaviors
                                                                 context
                              electronic data exchange              manual data entry/exchange




c05.indd 175                                                                                                                        12/19/07 4:16:15 PM
          176 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                  make the proper updates. This flow is diagrammed in Figure 5-8. Later analysis
                                  iterations send just modifications back to the structural engineer, requiring
                                  only incremental changes in the analysis dataset. Assumptions from the previ-
                                  ous analyses are maintained and the connection and loading assumptions only
                                  have to be updated for those members that were modified.

                                       The one-way workflow is closer to the form of current practice where the
                                  structural engineer sketches notes on the drawings regarding changes, but all
                                  updates are physically implemented by the design team. The second workflow
                                  is parallel to practices where the structural engineer can make changes directly
                                  to the information on a drawing set’s structural layers. The second workflow is
                                  significantly more efficient, allowing iterations to be made in minutes instead
                                  of days and can support step-by-step or even automated improvement and
                                  optimization, allowing full application of a structural engineer’s expertise.
                                       Two-way flows require special preparation of both the BIM design tool and
                                  the receiving analysis application. In order to match up the changed objects
                                  received back from the analysis application, a discriminating object-ID must
                                  be generated by the design application to be carried within the analysis applica-
                                  tion and returned with the updated dataset. The BIM design tool must generate
                                  the IDs for the objects that are to be passed back and forth. These are then
                                  matched in the design application against existing objects’ IDs to determine
                                  which objects have been modified, created or deleted. Similar matching is
                                  required in the analysis application. These two-way capabilities have been real-
                                  ized in the interfaces with some structural analyses. All building data models,
                                  IFC and CIS/2, support the definition of a globally unique ID (GUID).



          FIGURE 5-8
                                       BIM design tool                                Analysis Package
          The information flows      (designer/engineer)                            (structural engineer)
          supporting two-way
          exchange of analysis                               automated updating
          data.                        Merge changes                                  Perform Analysis



                                                                   Abstracted
                                                                 geometry, new                                 load cases and
                                       Model building                                Enter analysis data
                                                                or changed part                                use context




                                           object                                    site and   connection
                                         properties                               environmental behaviors
                                                                                     context

                                                 electronic data exchange               manual data entry/exchange




c05.indd 176                                                                                                               12/19/07 4:16:15 PM
                                                                                   5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   177

                    In summary, effective collaboration using two-way workflows can gener-
               ally be achieved between BIM design applications and structural analyses.
               Effort is still required to create effective two-way exchanges in most other
               analysis areas.
                    The rationale for quicker iterations between designers and consultants is
               part of the lean design philosophy. Long iterations result in both sides multi-
               tasking, often on multiple projects. Multi-tasking results in lost time remem-
               bering issues and context of the designs on each return to a project, and makes
               human errors more likely. Longer iterations lead to higher levels of multi-
               tasking, whereas shorter cycles allow continuous work on projects. The result
               is less wasted time and better progress on each design task.

               Experimental Design Using a Design ‘Workbench’
               While the previous sections outline standard practices regarding design devel-
               opment in large building projects, there is also another important use of analysis
               applications for innovative buildings that require a high level of design infor-
               mation development (see section 5.2.1). This is in the more experimental mode,
               where architects and/or engineers explore new structural systems, new energy
               distribution systems, new building environmental control systems, new materi-
               als or new construction methods, or other aspects of a building that may or
               may not work and be effective. These are examples of in-the-field design
               research.
                    An example of such explorations is the Al Hamra Firdous Tower to be built
               in Kuwait City, shown in Figure 5-9. With the aim of maximizing Gulf views
               and minimizing solar heat gain on the office floors, a quarter of each floor plate
               is chiseled out of the south face, shifting from west to east over the height of
               the tower. The result of this operation reveals a rich, monolithic stone at the
               south wall framed by the graceful, twisting ribbons of torqued walls and defines
               the iconic form of the tower. Extensive studies were undertaken to minimize
               solar gain. The panelization of the interior irregular surface required spe-
               cial study, shown in Figure 5-10. The layouts were managed using Visual Basic
               scripts; Digital Project was the design platform.
                    The case studies in Chapter 9 provide two other outstanding examples: the
               Beijing Aquatic Center, whose structural system is absolutely unique, and was
               developed through a large number of iterations optimizing different parts of
               the structural elements; and the San Francisco Federal Building, with its com-
               mitment to using natural ventilation in a highly innovative and engineered
               manner. Each of these designs relied on hundreds of analysis runs, in one case
               looped within an optimization tool. For undertaking such work, there is no
               straightforward approach; each project and experimental design problem poses
               its own questions.




c05.indd 177                                                                                                         12/19/07 4:16:16 PM
          178 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

          FIGURE 5-9
          A) A rendering of the
          412 meter Al Hamra
          Firdous Tower in
          Kuwait City by SOM.
          B) A typical floor plan
          showing the “chiseled
          out”, south-facing
          section of the floor
          plate that varies by
          floor. C) Case study
          models showing the”
          slice” from different
          views. (D) Model of
          internal core of tower.
          Images provided
          courtesy of SOM.




                                         For structures, experimental design can rarely be achieved through the use
                                    of stick models. Rather, it requires 3D finite element models. For energy stud-
                                    ies, standard building analysis tools cannot address certain aspects of materi-
                                    als, mechanical systems, or the control systems of interest. For example, double
                                    wall systems with adaptive automatic controls cannot be analyzed in a straight-
                                    forward manner within DOE-2 or Energy⫹. More creative methods of analysis
                                    must be undertaken. In each case, multiple tools are needed, and often,
                                    they must be organized in such a way that the output of one analysis supplies
                                    the input for another. General mathematical tools, such as MatLab® or Mathe-
                                    matica®, are often essential.
                                         One area of particular interest is the method of fabrication to support curved
                                    surfaces. Frank Gehry and Sir Norman Foster have shown that the development
                                    of freeform shapes in architecture can be accomplished by defining the external
                                    shell digitally and planning its fabrication in terms of the material shapes making
                                    up the form. Often these firms outline the fabrication of pieces used to construct
                                    the pieces, using computer numerical control (CNC) machinery. CNC equip-
                                    ment is required for economic reasons because every shape is unique. This has
                                    come to be known as ‘design-for-fabrication’, popularized by Kieran and




c05.indd 178                                                                                                        12/19/07 4:16:16 PM
                                                                                   5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes    179

                                                                                                     FIGURE 5-10
                                                                                                     The panelization layout
                                                                                                     for the Al Hamra
                                                                                                     Firdous Tower. The
                                                                                                     panels were con-
                                                                                                     trolled using Visual
                                                                                                     Basic scripts in Digital
                                                                                                     Project.
                                                                                                     Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                     of SOM.




               Timberlake’s book, Refabricating Architecture (Kieran and Timberlake 2003).
               How to design pieces of a building to take advantage of CNC production meth-
               ods is a high-demand area of exploration, in both architecture schools and inno-
               vative offices.
                   In addition to the Firdous Tower, another example of such work is pre-
               sented in Chapter 2, Figure 2-7, of the Dublin Ireland Football (soccer) stadium.
               The structural pieces are controlled by the parametric structure, allowing their
               forms to be automatically generated and later fabricated.




c05.indd 179                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:17 PM
          180 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                      Each method of fabrication has its own associated set of processes with
                                 specialized demands for the digital data that supports it. Fabrication rules and
                                 best practices address relevant issues associated with various steps in the design
                                 process, such as the conversion geometry to CNC machine instructions, meth-
                                 ods of connection, finish qualities, tolerances, and material sizes. These and
                                 other production processes are described in the book Digital Design and Man-
                                 ufacturing (Schodek et al. 2005).
                                      An exploration of new forms often benefits from an automated search over
                                 a large and abstract set of alternatives, e.g., optimization, as opposed to select-
                                 ing from a few manually generated alternatives. The challenge is to develop a
                                 well-defined range of designs that can be explored automatically and to iden-
                                 tify good solutions by establishing well-defined objective functions. This is
                                 greatly facilitated by defining a parametric closed model (meaning there is a
                                 closed, possibly huge, but finite space of possible configurations). For example,
                                 simulated annealing software is available from Taygeta Scientific® and is incor-
                                 porated into Mathematica®. This method was used in the structural optimiza-
                                 tion of the Beijing Aquatics Center (see Chapter 9). Another such product is
                                 modeFRONTIER (Esteco 2007).
                                      Until now, design optimization has been the exclusive capability of only a
                                 few firms, most notably Ove Arup and Partners. The opportunity now exists
                                 for a much wider application.

                                 5.3.3 Construction-Level Building Models
                                 Designers can approach the development of a construction-level model in at
                                 least two different ways:

                                    (1) As traditionally conceived, the building model is a detailed design
                                        expressing the intent of the designer and the client. In this view, the
                                        contractors are expected to develop their own independent construc-
                                        tion model and documents.
                                    (2) As a partially detailed model to be further detailed for use in all aspects
                                        of construction, planning, and fabrication. In this view, the design model
                                        is the starting point for elaboration by the construction team.

                                      The main reason why the first approach has traditionally been adopted by
                                 architects is to eliminate liability for construction issues by taking the approach
                                 that they are not providing construction information but only design intent. This
                                 is apparent in the text disclaimers that commonly appear on architectural draw-
                                 ings, which transfer responsibility for dimensional accuracy and correctness to




c05.indd 180                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:18 PM
                                                                                      5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes      181

               the contractors. Of course, technically this means that the contractor or fabrica-
               tors should develop their models from scratch, reflecting the intent of the designer,
               and requiring repeated rounds of submittals, design reviews, and corrections.
                    The authors consider such practices—based strictly on design intent—to
               be inherently inefficient and irresponsible to clients. We encourage designers
               to take the second view, providing their model information to fabricators and
               detailers and allowing them to elaborate the design information as needed to
               both maintain the design intent and refine the design for fabrication. Appropri-
               ate contracting methods to allow this are reviewed in Chapter 4.
                    The structural engineer’s model of the USC School of Cinematic Arts pro-
               vides an excellent example of this approach. As can be seen in Figure 5-11, the
               structural engineer has provided all of the structure geometry with cast-in-
               place concrete rebar and steel connection details. The different fabricators can
               all refine their details using the same model; coordination between the differ-
               ent systems is ensured.
                    Almost all existing tools for generating building information models sup-
               port a mixture of full 3D component representation, 2D representative sections,


                                                                                                        FIGURE 5-11
                                                                                                        A view of a design
                                                                                                        engineer’s Tekla
                                                                                                        Structures model of
                                                                                                        the USC School of
                                                                                                        Cinematic Arts.
                                                                                                        The model contains
                                                                                                        details for three
                                                                                                        subcontractors
                                                                                                        – structural steel, rebar
                                                                                                        fabricator and cast-
                                                                                                        in-place concrete – and
                                                                                                        enables the engineer
                                                                                                        to ensure design
                                                                                                        coordination among
                                                                                                        these systems. (See
                                                                                                        color insert for full color
                                                                                                        figure.)
                                                                                                        Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                        of Gregory P. Luth &
                                                                                                        Associates, Inc.




c05.indd 181                                                                                                                12/19/07 4:16:18 PM
          182 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 plus symbolic 2D or 3D schematic representations, such as centerline layouts.
                                 Pipe layouts may be defined in terms of their physical layout or as a centerline
                                 logical diagram with pipe diameters annotated alongside them. Similarly, elec-
                                 trical conduit can be placed in 3D or defined logically with dotted lines. As
                                 reviewed in Chapter 2, the building models resulting from this mixed strategy
                                 are only partially machine-readable. The level of detail within the model deter-
                                 mines how machine-readable it is and the functionality that it can achieve.
                                 Automated clash checking can only be applied to 3D solids. Decisions regard-
                                 ing the level of detail required of the model and its 3D geometry of elements
                                 must be made as construction level modeling proceeds.
                                      Today, recommended construction details supplied by product vendors
                                 cannot yet be defined in a generic form allowing insertion into a parametric
                                 3D model. This is because of the variety of underlying rule systems built into
                                 the different parametric modelers (as described in Section 2.2) Construction
                                 details are still most easily supplied in their conventional form, as drawn sec-
                                 tions. The potential benefits for supplying parametric 3D details, to strengthen
                                 vendor control of how their products are installed and detailed, has large
                                 implications regarding liability and warrantees. This issue is developed in
                                 Chapter 8. On the designers’ side, however, the current reliance on 2D sec-
                                 tions is both a rationale to not undertake 3D modeling at the detail level, and
                                 a quality control handicap to be overcome.

                                 Building System Layouts
                                 One of the major productivity benefits associated with BIM is in the area of
                                 mechanical, electrical, and plumbing design and contracting. In traditional con-
                                 struction methods, architects and MEP consultants logically define these systems
                                 in terms of components and general layout (using centerline approximations).
                                 Detailed layout and fabrication is left for subcontractors to complete for each
                                 respective system. Each trade must execute a detailed design, fabricate the parts,
                                 measure the actual spaces created following the onsite installation of preceding
                                 systems, make corrections (either to shop drawings or to already fabricated
                                 components), and finally install their systems. The resulting work process is
                                 lengthy, error prone, and wasteful.
                                      The alternative is to simultaneously ‘pull’ 3D detailed designs for all systems
                                 by using BIM for collaboration and relying on virtual construction of the building
                                 in the computer before it is built onsite. This enables a much higher degree of pre-
                                 fabrication and pre-assembly of integrated system units. These units may be deliv-
                                 ered just-in-time for onsite installation. This process is described in detail in
                                 Chapter 7. The Camino Medical Group Building and the GM Production Plant
                                 case studies in Chapter 9 are excellent examples of simultaneous pulled detailed




c05.indd 182                                                                                                      12/19/07 4:16:19 PM
                                                                                     5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   183

               design and fabrication processes. The benefits associated with this method involve
               a reduced need for onsite crews and space for laydown areas; and prefabricated
               units can be larger, which greatly reduces onsite fabrication time and cost. The
               implication for designing in this method is that all system layouts must be prepared
               in 3D before any fabrication begins. Modularization, planning for componentiza-
               tion, and simplifying onsite installation are additional design considerations.
                    Different construction types and building systems involve different kinds of
               expertise for detailing and layout. Curtain walls, especially for custom designed
               systems, involve specialized layout and engineering. Precast concrete and struc-
               tural steel are other areas that involve specialized design, engineering, and
               fabrication expertise. Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems require siz-
               ing and layout, usually within confined spaces. In these cases, specialists
               involved in the design require specific design objects and parametric modeling
               rules to lay out their systems, size them, and specify them. Later in the produc-
               tion process, the layouts are further refined to support automatic analyses at
               one level and automatic fabrication and quantity takeoff at the other.
                    Specialization, however, requires a careful approach for integration in
               order to realize efficient construction. The designers and the fabricators/con-
               structors for each system are typically separate and distinct organizations.
               While 3D layout during the design phase carries many benefits, if it is
               undertaken too early it may result in multiple iterations which will reduce or
               eliminate these benefits. On the other hand, if it is carried out too late, the
               project may be delayed. Prior to selecting a fabricator, the architects and MEP
               engineers should only generate “suggested layouts.” After the fabricator is
               selected, the production objects may be detailed and laid out; and this layout
               may differ from the original due to production preferences or advantages that
               are unique to the fabricator. Therefore the level of detail pursued in each sys-
               tem depends on contractual arrangements.
                    Fortunately, the boundary between system design and fabrication is always
               in flux. BIM tools will be most effective when used in parallel—and as seam-
               lessly as possible—by all system designers and fabricator subcontractors. We
               believe that BIM tools provide strong advantages for design-build contractual
               arrangements for building systems and that the use of construction detail level
               models—where design models are used directly for fabrication detailing—will
               become more prevalent due to cost and time savings.
                    In practice, each building system can be laid out separately, sharing only 3D
               reference geometry with the other systems to serve as a guide. This works well,
               allowing layout coordination to be managed without requiring full editing inter-
               operability. Both the host BIM design tools and the specialized building system
               design applications require effective reference geometry for importing as well




c05.indd 183                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:20 PM
          184 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 as exporting the system layouts that are to be used by system fabricators to
                                 guide their layouts.
                                      Numerous applications are available to facilitate operations within or in
                                 concert with the primary BIM design tools used by an A/E firm or consultant.
                                 A representative sample is shown in Table 5-4, which contains a list of mechani-
                                 cal and HVAC, electrical, piping, elevators and trip analyses and site planning
                                 applications. These support areas are undergoing rapid development by
                                 specialized building system software developers. The software under develop-
                                 ment is also being integrated with major BIM design tools and acquired by BIM
                                 vendors. As a result, BIM vendors will be able to offer increasingly complete
                                 building system design packages.
                                      Readers interested in more detailed discussion of the role of BIM in fabri-
                                 cation for construction are referred to Chapter 7, which focuses exclusively on
                                 these aspects.

                                 Drawing and Document Production
                                 Drawing generation is an important BIM production capability, and will
                                 remain so for another decade or so. At some point, drawings will stop being

                                 Table 5-4        Building system layout applications.
                                  Building System                         Application

                                  Mechanical & HVAC       Carrier E20-II HVAC System Design
                                                          Bentley Building Mechanical Systems
                                                          Vectorworks Architect
                                                          ADT Building Systems
                                                          Autodesk Revit® Systems

                                  Electrical              Bentley Building Electrical
                                                          Vectorworks Architect
                                                          Autodesk Revit® Systems

                                  Piping                  Vectorworks Architect
                                                          ProCAD 3D Smart
                                                          Quickpen Pipedesigner 3D
                                                          Autodesk Revit® Systems

                                  Elevators/Escalators    Elevate 6.0

                                  Site Planning           Autodesk Civil 3D
                                                          Bentley PowerCivil
                                                          Eagle Point’s Landscape & Irrigation Design

                                  Structural              Tekla Structures
                                                          Autodesk Revit® Structures
                                                          Bentley Structural




c05.indd 184                                                                                                  12/19/07 4:16:20 PM
                                                                                    5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   185

               the design information of record and instead the model will become the pri-
               mary legal and contractual source of building information. However, today
               every design firm of record still needs to produce schematic design, design
               development, and construction drawings, to fulfill contract requirements, to
               satisfy building code requirements, for contractor/fabricator estimation, and
               to serve as the contract documents between designer and contractors. These
               documents have important uses, beyond their contractual ones. Drawings
               are used during construction to guide layout and work. In the Penn National
               case study in Chapter 9, existing contractual requirements enforced the use of
               drawings, even where they were no longer needed for some of these functions.
               General drawing production requirements from BIM tools are presented in
               Chapter 2, Section 2.2.3.
                    A single model representation both guarantees consistency and automates
               most aspects of drawing production. This is realized by the single model being
               used to generate all plans, sections, elevations, structural, mechanical, electri-
               cal and other systems drawings. Supported by appropriate libraries, construc-
               tion documentation production time can be significantly reduced.
                    With the development of BIM and its report generating capabilities, once
               the legal restrictions on the format of drawings is eliminated, options arise that
               can further improve the productivity of design and construction. Already, fab-
               ricators that have adopted BIM tools are developing new drawing and report
               generation layouts that better serve specific purposes. These apply not only to
               rebar bending and bills of material, but also layout drawings that take advan-
               tage of the 3D modeling of BIM tools. An aspect of BIM research is the devel-
               opment of specialized drawings for different fabricators and installers. An
               excellent example is provided in Figure 5-12. New representations facilitating
               easy interpretation of research results during design is another area where
               research is enhancing BIM capabilities.
                    The long-term goal is to completely automate the production of drawings
               from a model. However, a close look at special conditions makes evident that var-
               ious special cases arise in most projects that are themselves so rare that planning
               for them and preparing template rules is not worth the effort. Thus review for
               completeness and layout of all drawing reports prior to release is likely to remain
               a needed task for the foreseeable future.

               Specifications
               A fully detailed 3D model or building model does not yet provide sufficiently
               definitive information for constructing a building. The model (or historically,
               the corresponding drawing set) omits technical specifications of materials, fin-
               ishes, quality grades, construction procedures, and other information required




c05.indd 185                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:16:20 PM
          186 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

          FIGURE 5-12
          Detailed layout of
          the auditorium at
          the Merck Research
          Laboratories Boston.
          Associated drawings in-
          cluded panel fabrication
          layout. The design was
          especially complicated
          because of the skewed
          structural grid.
          Image provided courtesy
          of KlingStubbins.




                                     for managing the realization of a desired building outcome. This additional
                                     information is packaged as the project specifications. Specifications are organ-
                                     ized according to types of materials within a project and/or classes of work.
                                     Standard specification classifications are Uniformat® (of which there are two
                                     slightly different versions) or Masterformat®. For each material, type of prod-
                                     uct, or type of work, the specification defines the quality of the products or
                                     materials and identifies any special work processes that need to be followed.
                                          Various IT applications are available for selecting and editing the specifica-
                                     tions relevant to a given project, and in some cases, to cross-link them with
                                     relevant components in the model. One of the earliest specification systems to
                                     cross-reference with a BIM design model was e-Specs®, which cross-links with
                                     objects in Revit®. e-Specs maintains consistency between the reference object
                                     and the specification. If the reference-object is changed, the user is notified
                                     that the relevant specification must be updated. Specifications can also be
                                     associated with library objects, so that a spec is automatically applied when the
                                     library object is incorporated into the design.
                                          Uniformat defines a document structure that was conceived as a compan-
                                     ion to a construction drawing set. One limitation of this tool is the specification




c05.indd 186                                                                                                         12/19/07 4:16:21 PM
                                                                                     5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   187

               structure covers broad areas with multiple possible applications within a given
               building project. Logically, this limits links to one-way functions, because a
               single specification clause applies to multiple but somewhat diverse objects in
               the design. One cannot directly access the objects that a spec paragraph applies
               to. This limitation restricts the management of specification quality. The Con-
               struction Specification Institute (the owner of Uniformat®) is decomposing
               the structure of Uniformat to support a bi-directional relationship between
               building objects and specifications. The new classifications, called Omniclass®,
               will lead to a more easily managed structure for specification information of
               model objects (OmniClass 2007).

               5.3.4 Design-Construction Integration
               The historical separation of design from construction did not exist in medie-
               val times and only appeared during the Renaissance. Throughout long periods
               of history, the separation was minimized through the development of close
               working relationships between construction craftsmen, who in their later
               years would work ‘white collar jobs’ as draftsmen in the offices of architects
               (Johnston 2006). But in recent years, that link has weakened. Draftsmen are
               chiefly junior architects and the communication channel between field crafts-
               men and the design office has atrophied. In its place, an adversarial relation-
               ship has arisen, largely due to the risks associated with liabilities when serious
               problems arise.
                    To make matters worse, the complexity of modern buildings has made the
               task of maintaining consistency between increasingly large sets of drawings
               extremely challenging, even with the use of computerized drafting and document
               control systems. The probability of errors, either in intent or from inconsist-
               ency, rises sharply as more detailed information is provided. Quality control
               procedures are rarely capable of catching all errors, but ultimately, all errors are
               revealed during construction.
                    A building project requires design not only of the built product but also
               design of the process of construction. This recognition lies at the heart of
               design-construction integration. It implies a design process that is conscious
               of the technical and organizational implications inherent in how a building
               and its systems are put together as well as the aesthetic and functional quali-
               ties of the finished product. In practical terms, a building project relies on
               close collaboration between experts situated across the spectrum of building
               construction knowledge, as well as particularly close collaboration between
               the design team and the contractors and fabricators. The intended result is a
               designed product and process that are coherent and integrates all the relevant
               knowledge.




c05.indd 187                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:22 PM
          188 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                     Different forms of procurement and contracting are reviewed in Chapters 1
                                 and 4. While the contractor perspective is given in Chapter 6, here we consider
                                 teaming from the designer’s perspective. Below, we list a few of the benefits of
                                 integration:

                                     • Early identification of long lead-time items and shortening of the procure-
                                       ment schedule (see the GM Production Plant case study in Chapter 9).
                                     • Value engineering as design proceeds, with continuous cost estimates
                                       and schedules, so that tradeoffs are integrated fully into the design rather
                                       than after-the-fact in the form of ‘amputations.’
                                     • Early exploration and setting of design constraints related to construc-
                                       tion issues. Insights can be gained from contractors and fabricators so
                                       that the design facilitates constructability and reflects best practice,
                                       rather than making changes later with added cost or accepting inferior
                                       detailing. By designing initially with fabrication best-practices in mind,
                                       the overall construction cycle is reduced.
                                     • Facilitating identification of the interaction between erection sequences
                                       and design details and reducing erection issues early on.
                                     • Reducing the differences between the construction models developed by
                                       designers and the manufacturing models needed by fabricators, thus elim-
                                       inating unnecessary steps and shortening the overall design/production
                                       process.
                                     • Significantly shortened cycle times for fabrication detailing, reducing
                                       the effort required for design intent review and consistency errors.

                                      Part of the design-construction collaboration involves (and requires)
                                 deciding when the construction staff is to be brought on. Their involvement
                                 can begin at the project’s outset, allowing construction considerations to influ-
                                 ence the project from the beginning. Later involvement is justified when the
                                 project follows well-tried construction practices or when programmatic issues
                                 are important and do not require contractor or fabricator expertise. Increasingly,
                                 the general trend is to involve contractors and fabricators earlier in the process,
                                 which often results in the gaining of efficiencies that would not be captured in
                                 a traditional design-bid-build plan.

                                 5.3.5 Design Review
                                 In the new methods of practice outlined above, the separation between the design
                                 model and fabrication model is greatly reduced and often carried out in an




c05.indd 188                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:22 PM
                                                                                    5.3 BIM Use in Design Processes   189

                                                                                                      FIGURE 5-13
                                                                                                      Traditional design
                                                                                                      review process,
                                                                                                      including alternative
                                                                                                      equipment selection.




               overlapping timeframe. However realized, the final arrangement results in two
               building system models, one capturing the design intent and used to coordinate
               all systems, and fabrication (or shop) models of specific systems that capture the
               production design and detailing needed for fabrication and erection.
                    Evolution of the design model to the fabrication model inevitably involves
               additions and changes. These changes must be reviewed by the design team to
               verify that the design intent has not been lost. Two kinds of reviews are required:
               (1) replacement of one piece of equipment or manufactured piece with another,
               which may have different shape and connections (we assume that the specifica-
               tion review and acceptance is handled separately); (2) that the geometry or
               placement of manufactured and made-to-order pieces are consistent with the
               placement and geometry of all other components.
                    In traditional paper-based methods, these two checks require the compari-
               son of the design (contract) documents with the fabricator’s shop drawings,
               often by overlaying the two sets of drawings on a light table. The process is dia-
               gramed in Figure 5-13. Because of different layouts, formats and conventions,
               these comparisons are arduous and traditionally can take a week or more.
                    In the new process (Figure 5-14), upfront collaboration between designer
               and fabricator allows system products to be selected early, so that layout can
               be done once in a consistent manner. With fully 3D models, shop model
               review is reduced to loading the two 3D models into a reviewing system to
               check placement and that the important surfaces overlap. Examples of this




c05.indd 189                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:22 PM
          190 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

          FIGURE 5-14
          A model-based design
          review of fabrication
          models.




                                  process are presented in the GM Flint Michigan and also the San Francisco
                                  Federal Building case study by Morphosis, both in Chapter 9. Coincident sur-
                                  faces are automatically highlighted for the reviewers’ attention. This reduces
                                  the time and effort required to identify errors. In the future, we expect that the
                                  overlap reporting will be further augmented by rule-based checking to iden-
                                  tify those objects that have moved or that have had their finished surfaces
                                  moved beyond some preset tolerance, thus further automating the review
                                  process.



                                       5.4 BUILDING ELEMENT MODELS AND LIBRARIES*

                                  BIM involves the definition of a building as a composed set of objects. BIM
                                  design tools provide different pre-defined libraries of fixed geometry and
                                  parametric objects. These are typically generic objects based on standard
                                  onsite construction practices that are appropriate for early-stage design (see
                                  Table 2-1). As a design is developed, object definitions become more spe-
                                  cific, elaborated with expected or targeted performances, such as for energy,
                                  sound, and cost, etc. Visual features are also added to support rendering.
                                  Technical and performance requirements can be outlined so that object defi-
                                  nitions specify what the final constructed or purchased product should
                                  achieve. This product specification then becomes a guide for selecting or



                                  * This section was adapted from information provided by James A. (Andrew) Arnold, courtesy of
                                  Tectonic Partners.




c05.indd 190                                                                                                                12/19/07 4:16:23 PM
                                                                            5.4 Building Element Models and Libraries   191

               constructing the final object. Previously, different models or datasets were
               hand-built for these different purposes and not integrated. Now it is possible
               to define an object once and use it for multiple purposes. The challenge is to
               develop an easy-to-use and consistent means for defining object instances
               appropriate for the current stage of design and supporting the various uses
               identified for the stage. Later, the specification is superseded by the selected
               product. Thus, multiple levels of object definition and specification are
               needed. These range from early stage design using generic objects to fabrica-
               tion-level detailing of the final object as it will be implemented, whether as a
               constructed component or commercial product. Throughout this process,
               objects undergo a sequence of refinements of shape material properties used
               to support analyses, simulation, cost estimation, and other uses. Some issues
               of managing object properties are reviewed in Section 2.2.2. Over time, we
               expect these sequences to be better defined as phases, which are different
               from SD, DD and CD, to become more structured and part of regular prac-
               tice. At the end of construction, the building model will consist of hundreds
               or thousands of building element models that can be transferred to a facility
               management organization to support operations and management (see
               Chapter 4).
                    For reference, there are over 10,000 building product manufacturers in
               North America. Each manufacturer produces a few to tens of thousands of
               products resulting in potentially hundreds of thousands of products and prod-
               uct applications for fulfilling a broad range of architectural expression.
                    Building Element Models (BEMs) are 2D and 3D geometric representations
               of physical products such as doors, windows, equipment, furniture, fixtures,
               and high-level assemblies of walls, roofs, ceilings, and floors at the various levels
               of detail needed, including specific products. For design firms involved in
               particular building types, parametric models of space types may also be carried
               in libraries, such as for hospital operating suites or radiation treatment rooms,
               to enable their re-use across projects. We consider these spatial and construc-
               tion assemblies to also be BEMs. Over time, the knowledge encoded in these
               model libraries will become a strategic asset. They will represent ‘best-practices,’
               as firms incrementally improve and annotate them with information based on
               project use and experiences. The risk for errors and omissions will decrease as
               firms realize greater success in developing and using high quality models from
               previous use.

               5.4.1 Object Libraries
               It is anticipated that BEM libraries will reference useful information for a range of
               contexts and applications throughout the project delivery and facility maintenance




c05.indd 191                                                                                                            12/19/07 4:16:24 PM
          192 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                 life-cycle. Developing and managing BEMs introduces new challenges for AEC
                                 firms, because of the large number of objects, assemblies, and object families that
                                 need to be structured for access, possibly involving multiple office locations.


                                 Organization and Access
                                 A review of current BIM design tools shows that they have each defined and
                                 implemented a heterogeneous set of object types, using unique object families
                                 (see Table 2-1). These objects will need to be accessed and integrated into
                                 projects using standard nomenclature for cross-product interpretation. This
                                 would enable them to support interoperability, interfacing with cost estima-
                                 tion, analysis, and eventually building code and building program assessment
                                 applications, among others. This includes naming, attribute structure, and
                                 possibly the designation of topological interfaces with other objects reflected
                                 in the rules used to define them. This may involve translation of objects to a
                                 common structure or defining a dynamic mapping capability that allows them
                                 to maintain their ‘native’ terms but also allows them to be interpretable with
                                 synonym and hyponym relations. A hyponym is a more restricted or more
                                 general term then the target one. Roof structure, for example, is a hyponym
                                 for space frame.
                                      The complexity and company investment needed to develop BEM content
                                 suggests the need for tools for management and distribution that allow users
                                 to find, visualize, and use BEM content. Classifications, such as CSI Masterfor-
                                 mat or Uniformat, are orthogonal to BEM. A door is a door, whether indexed
                                 by one classification or another. The new Omniclass™ classifications, now in
                                 draft form by the CSI, are expected to provide more detailed object-specific
                                 classifications and accessing mechanisms (Omniclass 2007). Given these new
                                 tools for indexing BEM classifications, it should be possible to organize BEMs
                                 for access by any number of classification schemas. A well designed library
                                 management system should support this flexibility for navigating a classifica-
                                 tion tree of BEM models.


                                 5.4.2 Portals
                                 Public and private portals are emerging in the marketplace. Public portals
                                 provide content and promote community through forums and indexes to
                                 resources, blogs, etc. The content tools primarily support hierarchical naviga-
                                 tion, search, download, and in some cases upload for BEM files. Private portals
                                 permit object sharing between firms and their peers that subscribe to joint shar-
                                 ing agreements under control of server access and management. Firms or groups
                                 of firms that understand the value in BEM content and the value/cost relation in




c05.indd 192                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:24 PM
                                                                           5.4 Building Element Models and Libraries   193

               different application areas may share BEMs or jointly support their development.
               Private portals enable firms to share common content and also protect content
               that encodes specific, proprietary design knowledge.
                    Table 5-5 lists several portal sites. Most content is generic. One portal,
               BIMWorld, specializes in building product manufacturer specific content.
               Though its coverage is thin, it demonstrates that building product manufactur-
               ers are recognizing the importance of distributing product information in BEM
               format. It provides fully parametric objects with topological connectivity for
               Revit®, for ADT, and to a lesser degree for Bentley and ArchiCAD®. The Form
               Fonts EdgeServer™ product is an example of server technology that supports
               controlled sharing between peers.
                    The Google 3D Warehouse is a public repository for SketchUp content. This
               service could force a re-thinking of the library metaphor given the tools, tech-
               nologies, and business opportunities it provides. 3D Warehouse incorporates:

                   • The ability for anyone to create a segmented area of the warehouse;
                   • The ability for anyone to create a schema and classification hierarchy to
                     support library search;
                   • Free storage and other back-end services (reliability, redundancy etc.);
                   • The ability for a developer to link from a Web page to a model in 3D
                     Warehouse, thereby putting up a storefront that uses 3D Warehouse as
                     a back-end.

                    These capabilities are enabled by technologies that make use of semantic
               modeling for search, broadband access, and maturing tools and standards for
               application interaction, as well as to create new business opportunities. For exam-
               ple, McGraw Hill Sweets has begun experimenting with 3D Warehouse by creat-
               ing a McGraw Hill Sweets’ Group and placing Sweets-certified manufacturer
               BEM models in SketchUp format in the Warehouse. This Google distributed
               service technology for storage and search, combined with Sweets domain infor-
               mation and know-how for developing an AEC-specific domain model, is an exam-
               ple of new business opportunities enabled by technology. Google Warehouse
               objects are described as being for early design and have the editing and content
               capabilities and limitations of SketchUp. The formats of the objects in these dif-
               ferent portals are those formats supported by the portal’s content platform.

               5.4.3 Desktop/LAN Libraries
               Private libraries are desktop software packages designed to manage BEM con-
               tent and closely integrate with the user’s desktop file management system.
               They automate the loading of BEMs into a standalone library from a BIM tool,




c05.indd 193                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:24 PM
c05.indd 194




                      Table 5-5      Comparison features of public BEM product portals.
                                                Public,
                                       Firm    Private or                                                   Product       BEM
                                     Developed Peer to        Version                                      Configura-   Modeling      Ranking/       Content
                       Portals         BEM        Peer      Management       Navigation        Selection      tion      Guidelines   Annotation      Platform       Website:
                                                                                                                                                                                    194 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers



                                                                                ®                                                                         ®
                        Autodesk No            Public       No           By Revit              Yes         No           No           No           Revit         http://
                        Revit® 9.0                                       Categories                                                                             revit.autodesk.
                        Library                                                                                                                                 com/library/html/
                                                                                                                                                                index.html

                        Revit City   No        Public       By Revit®    By CSI                Yes         No           No           Rating       Revit®        http://www.
                                                            software     Masteerformat                                                                          revitcity.com/
                                                            release      04, Revit City                                                                         downloads.php
                                                                         organization,
                                                                         Keyword

                        Autodesk     No        Public       by Revit®    By Revit® category,   Yes         No           No           No           Revit®        http://www.augi.
                        Revit®                              software     Revit® Release,                                                                        com/revit.
                        User                                release      Unit of Measure,                                                                       exchange/
                        Group                                            Manufacturer,                                                                          rpcviewer.asp
                                                                         Author

                        Objects      No        Public       No           By ObjectsOnline      Yes         No           No           No           ArchiCAD®,   http://www.
                        Online                                           Category                                                                 AutoCAD®,    objectsonline.
                                                                                                                                                  and SketchUp com/customer/
                                                                                                                                                               home.php




12/19/07 4:16:25 PM
c05.indd 195



                      Google    Yes    Public     No   Ability to create      Yes   No          No    Rating   SketchUp        http://sketchup.
                      Warehouse                        classification                                                          google.com/
                                                       schema and add                                                          3dwarehouse/
                                                       search tags

                      BIMWorld   No    Public     No   By CSI                 Yes   Link to      No   No       Revit®,         http://www.
                                                       Masterformat 04,             mfr-provided               AutoCAD®,       bimworld.com/
                                                       by Uniformat, by             configurator               Microstation,
                                                       Manufacturer                 in a few                   SketchUp
                                                                                    cases

                      Form       Yes   Public,    No   By CSI                 Yes   No          No    No       SketchUp,       http://www.
                      Fonts            peer-to-        Masterformat, by                                        also Auto-      formfonts.com
                                       peer            Keyword, platform,                                      CAD®, Revit®,
                                                       manufacturer                                            ArchiCAD®,
                                                                                                               3DMax,
                                                                                                               Lightwave

                      BIM        Yes   Private    No   By Revit® Category,    Yes   No          No    Yes      AutoCAD®,       http://www.digital-
                      Content                          folder, project, CSI                                    Revit®          buildingsolutions.
                      Manager                          Masterformat,                                                           com/
                                                       Uniformat,
                                                       Keyword,
                                                       manufacturer

                      BIM        Yes   Private    No   By Revit® category     Yes   No          Yes   No       Revit®          http://www.
                      Library                                                                                                  tectonicbim.com
                      Manager




                                                                                                                                                     5.4 Building Element Models and Libraries




                                                                                                                                                     195

12/19/07 4:16:25 PM
          196 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

          FIGURE 5-15
          Multi-level structure           Thumbnails of
          of Tectonic Network’s          element classes
          Element Library.              Top level library
          Image provided courtesy            categories
          of Tectonic Partners, Inc.   Library categories
                                               expanded

                                                   DWF,
                                             if available

                                                Element
                                              properties


                                               Element
                                              guidelines




                                       such as Revit®, or the user’s own file system or a corporate network. They
                                       provide taxonomy for classification and definition of property sets upon entry
                                       and later for searches and inspection for retrieval. They assist searching, for
                                       example based on 3D visualization, inspection of categories, types, and prop-
                                       erty sets. The companies providing such tools also plan public portals for
                                       sharing BEMs across firms (file upload and download, community tools, etc.)
                                       and distributing manufacturer specific BEMs for building products.
                                            One example of these products is Tectonic Partner’s BIM Library Manager
                                       (Arnold 2007). It includes best practice guidelines for BEM modeling on
                                       the Revit® platform and supports incremental and dynamic elaboration of the
                                       underlying BEM as designers obtain information and attribute data from dif-
                                       ferent sources. Figure 5-15 shows the Tectonic BIM Library Manager. The tree
                                       view of Revit® Families shows all families in the file system that are automati-
                                       cally loaded into the Library. BIMworld has introduced a similar product,
                                       called BIMContentManager. It works in conjunction with their portal. Addi-
                                       tional products are being developed by both companies around these library
                                       capabilities.



                                             5.5 CONSIDERATIONS IN ADOPTION
                                                 FOR DESIGN PRACTICE

                                       Moving the base representation of building design from a set of drawings, even if
                                       produced digitally, to a building model has many potential direct benefits: auto-
                                       matically consistent drawings, identification and removal of 3D spatial conflicts,




c05.indd 196                                                                                                          12/19/07 4:16:26 PM
                                                                   5.5 Considerations in Adoption for Design Practice   197

               automatic and accurate preparation of bills-of-material, improved support for
               analysis, cost and scheduling applications, and others. Three-dimensional mode-
               ling throughout the entire design process facilitates coordination and design
               review; and these capabilities lead to more accurate design drawings, faster and
               more productive drawing production, and improved design quality.


               5.5.1 BIM Justification
               While BIM offers the potential to realize new benefits, these benefits are not
               free. The development of a 3D model, especially one that includes information
               that supports analyses and facilitates fabrication, involves more decisions and
               incorporates more effort than the current set of construction documents. Con-
               sidering the inevitable additional costs of implementing new systems, retrain-
               ing staff, and developing new procedures, it is easy to assume that the benefits
               may not seem worthwhile. Most firms that have taken these steps, however,
               have found that the significant initial costs associated with the transition result
               in productivity benefits at the construction document level. Even the initial
               transition to producing consistent drawings from a model is worthwhile.
                    In the existing business structure of the construction industry, designers
               are usually paid a fee calculated as a percentage of construction cost. Success
               in a project is largely intangible, involving smoother execution and fewer prob-
               lems, improved realization of design intent – and realizing a profit. With the
               growing awareness of the capabilities offered by BIM technology and practices,
               building clients and contractors are exploring new business opportunities (see
               Chapters 4 and 6). Designers can begin to offer new services that can be added
               to the fee structure. These services can be grouped into two broad areas:

                   1) Concept design development:
                   Performance-based design using analysis applications and simulation tools
               to address:

                   • sustainability and energy efficiency,
                   • cost and value analysis during design,
                   • programmatic assessment using simulation of operations, such as in
                     healthcare facilities.

                   2) Integrating design with construction:

                   • Improved collaboration with the project team: structural, mechanical,
                     electrical engineers, steel, MEP, precast and curtainwall fabricators. BIM
                     use among a project team improves design review feedback, reduces
                     errors, lowers contingency issues, and leads to faster construction.




c05.indd 197                                                                                                            12/19/07 4:16:27 PM
          198 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                         • Expedited construction, facilitating offsite fabrication of assemblies,
                                           and reducing field work.
                                         • Automation in procurement, fabrication and assembly and early pro-
                                           curement of long lead-time items.

                                          Additional services during the concept design phase can have major owner
                                     benefits regarding reduced construction costs, lower operating costs, and
                                     improving organizational productivity and effectiveness. Comparing initial
                                     costs with operating costs is notoriously difficult, with varying discount rates,
                                     varied maintenance schedules and poorly tracked costs. However, studies from
                                     Veterans Administration hospitals have found that less than eighteen months
                                     of functional operations of a VA hospital are equal to its construction costs,
                                     (see Figure 5-16) meaning that savings in hospital operations, even with higher
                                     first cost, can be hugely beneficial. The VA has also found that the lifetime fully
                                     amortized costs of energy are equal to one eighth of construction costs (See
                                     figure 5-16) and this percentage is likely to increase. In addition, the VA has
                                     found that fully discounted plant operating costs (including energy and build-
                                     ing security) are roughly equal to construction costs. There are many other cost
                                     items available from (Department of Veteran Affairs 2007). These examples
                                     provide an indication of the reduction in operating costs and increases in per-
                                     formance that building owners/operators will be seeking.
                                          The benefits of integrating BIM design with construction are already well
                                     articulated in Section 5.3.4.

                                     BIM Design Productivity Benefits
                                     One way to indirectly assess the production benefits of a technology such as
                                     BIM is according to the reduction of errors. These are easily tracked by the
                                     number of Requests for Information (RFI s) and Change Orders (COs) on a
                                     project. These will always include a component based on the client’s change of
                                     mind or changes in external conditions. However, changes based on internal
                                     consistency and correctness can be distinguished and their numbers on different


          FIGURE 5-16                                         Average Liftime Costs for Veterans' Hospitals
          The various components                                         Capital:
          of the lifetime capital                               non-construction
                                                             Construction 2.5%      Financial fees
          and operating costs of a                                  8.3%            1.2%
          veteran’s hospital.                                8.8%
          Image provided                      Plant operations and
          courtesy of Veteran’s              maintenance (includes
                                                   1.1% for energy
          Administration (Smoot                      consumption)                                      80.0%
          2007).                                                                                       Functional operations




c05.indd 198                                                                                                                   12/19/07 4:16:27 PM
                                                                   5.5 Considerations in Adoption for Design Practice   199

               projects collected. These indicate an important benefit of BIM and have been
               reported in several of the case studies in Chapter 9.
                    Another way to assess technology benefits is in terms of productivity. Labor
               productivity is the total cost in terms of labor hours and salaries to realize some
               task. It is an often under-applied consideration for design firms. More often,
               decisions are made according to the qualitative benefits outlined above, and the
               anticipated future benefits – as a change in the culture of construction. If a tech-
               nology can reduce the number of hours required to produce a given result, for
               example construction documentation, then the return on investment can be
               assessed by calculating the value of the reduction in labor costs and comparing
               it with the various investments required.
                    Design firms are often not familiar with methods of assessing productivity.
               An initial step in making such an assessment is to establish a baseline for com-
               parison. Few firms keep track of the unit costs associated with design develop-
               ment and construction drawing detailing, for example, based on building floor
               area, facade area, or project type. These can provide a baseline metric to evalu-
               ate the costs or benefits of a transition to new design technologies (such a
               method is described by (Thomas et al. 1999).
                    The second step is to estimate the productivity gain of the new technology,
               in this case BIM. Apart from the productivity enhancement figures provided by
               various BIM vendors (Autodesk 2004), there is little data available within
               design firms that have already adopted BIM or even in available research litera-
               ture. Research into the productivity gain for producing structural engineering
               drawings with rebar detailing has yielded gains between 21% and 59%, depend-
               ing on the size, complexity, and repetitiveness of the structures (Sacks and Barak
               2006). A few figures are also provided in the case studies in Chapter 9. Of
               course, benefits for a particular design firm are necessarily speculative until real
               projects are undertaken. An assessment should distinguish time saved weighted
               according to the average wage of those doing the work and its percentage of the
               firm’s annual labor cost. This will provide a weighted productivity gain. The
               resulting percentage can be multiplied by the annual direct labor costs for design
               activities to compute the annual benefit.
                    The last step is to calculate the investment costs of adoption. The largest cost
               will be the labor cost of training time, which should include both direct costs for
               time spent and also the ‘learning curve cost’ of initially reduced productivity as
               people learn to use the new tools. Hardware and software costs can be estimated
               in consultation with a BIM vendor. Productivity benefits will grow to their full
               extent over time. Finally, the total annual benefit divided by the total cost should
               provide a quick measure of the annual return on investment and the time needed
               to recoup the cost.




c05.indd 199                                                                                                            12/19/07 4:16:28 PM
          200 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                     Section 2.3.1 provides guidelines for the selection of BIM tools. Modeling
                                 tools are not only for internal usage. Another consideration is the needs of com-
                                 panies that are frequent design partners. Ideally, if there are certain dominant
                                 working relations, decisions should be made with some level of coordination.
                                     It also should be recognized that a single BIM tool is not necessarily ideal.
                                 Some firms decide not to limit themselves to a single model generation tool,
                                 but rather to support multiple BIM products, recognizing that some tools have
                                 non-overlapping benefits.


                                 5.5.2 Training and Deployment
                                 BIM is of course a new IT environment, requiring training, system configura-
                                 tion, library and document template setup, and adaptation of design review
                                 and approval procedures, often combined with new business practices. These
                                 need to be developed incrementally, side-by-side with existing production
                                 methods, so that learning problems do not jeopardize the completion of cur-
                                 rent projects.
                                      We encourage preparation of a detailed deployment plan for any firm con-
                                 sidering making a change to BIM; adoption should not be treated as an ad hoc
                                 activity. The more grounded the plan is in relation to a company’s strategic
                                 goals, the more successful adoption is likely to be. The following sections
                                 address a range of issues to be considered in the deployment plan.
                                      Training usually starts with one or a small number of IT specialists that
                                 both plan for system configurations and introduce a training program for the
                                 rest of the firm. System configuration includes hardware selection (BIM tools
                                 demand powerful workstation hardware), server set up, plotting and printing
                                 configurations, network access, integration with reporting and project account-
                                 ing, setup of libraries (described in Sec. 5.4.1), and other company-specific
                                 system issues.
                                      Early projects should focus on the basic skills needed for modeling build-
                                 ings and producing drawings, including incrementally compiling object librar-
                                 ies and getting the basics down before undertaking more advanced integration
                                 efforts. After the basics of project management have been realized, the door is
                                 open to a variety of extensions for taking advantage of the multiple integration
                                 and interoperability benefits that BIM offers.
                                      An important note of caution during the early phase of BIM adoption is to
                                 avoid providing too much model detail too soon. Because methods of project
                                 definition and detailing are partially automated in BIM, it is possible, if details
                                 are defined too quickly, for a design concept to be misinterpreted. Detailed
                                 models are easy to realize while still in the conceptual design phase but may lead




c05.indd 200                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:28 PM
                                                                  5.5 Considerations in Adoption for Design Practice   201

               to errors and client misunderstanding by inadvertently making overreaching
               decisions that become hard to reverse. It is important for BIM users to understand
               this issue and to manage the level of detailing more explicitly than would be
               done by hand. A reconsideration of the level of detail provided to consultants
               and collaborators has also been found to be worthwhile. These parties can be
               brought into discussions earlier or later, depending on their roles. Detailed MEP
               3D layout should not be done until later in the process to avoid multiple revi-
               sions. On the other hand, curtain wall consultants and fabricators may be
               brought in earlier to help plan structural connections and detailing.
                    Architects represent only one component of an overall design team. Col-
               laboration requires a number of engineering, mechanical, or other specialty
               consultants. The default initial integration arrangement is to rely on drawings
               in the conventional manner. Very quickly, however, the extra steps required for
               producing drawings leads to the desire for model-based exchanges (the issues
               involved are reviewed in detail in Chapter 3). Data exchange methods must be
               worked out on a company-by-company basis. Model-based coordination using
               web conferencing is a straightforward and very effective means of managing
               projects (see Section 5.3.2).

               5.5.3 Phased Utilization
               A wide range of integration capabilities are reviewed at the start of this chapter
               and in the expanded set of design services discussed in Section 5.4.1. These
               should be kept in mind as new projects offer opportunities to move BIM inte-
               gration to new levels. In addition to external services discussed earlier, other
               services can be undertaken in almost any context. Among these are:

                   • Integration with cost estimation to allow continuous tracking through-
                     out project development.
                   • Integration with specifications for better information management.
                   • Development of proprietary company libraries of detailing, room con-
                     figurations, and other design information to facilitate the transfer of spe-
                     cialized staff knowledge to corporate knowledge.

                    Each type of integration involves its own planning and development of
               workflows and methods. For example, data exchange methods require definition,
               testing, and coordination among participants. Taking a step-by-step approach
               will allow for incremental training and adoption of advanced services without
               undue risks, which will lead to radically new capabilities within the overall
               design firm.




c05.indd 201                                                                                                           12/19/07 4:16:28 PM
          202 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                      5.6 NEW AND CHANGED STAFFING
                                          WITHIN DESIGN FIRMS

                                 The greatest challenge in implementing new design technologies is the
                                 intellectual transition in getting senior design team leaders to adopt new prac-
                                 tices. These senior staff, often partners, have decades of experience with clients,
                                 design development procedures, design and construction planning and sched-
                                 uling, and project management that represent part of the core intellectual
                                 property within any successful firm. The challenge is to engage them in the
                                 transition in a way that enables them to realize both their own expertise and
                                 also the new capabilities that BIM offers them.
                                      Among the several potentially effective ways to address this challenge:

                                     • Team partners with young BIM-savvy design staff who can integrate the
                                       partner’s knowledge with the new technology.
                                     • Provide one-on-one training one day a week or on a similar schedule.
                                     • Host a charette for design teams that includes training for partners in a
                                       relaxed offsite location.


                                      Similar transition issues exist with other senior staff, such as project man-
                                 agers and similar methods may be used to facilitate their transition. No method
                                 is sure-fire. The transition of a design organization is largely cultural. Through
                                 their actions, support, and expression of values, senior associates communi-
                                 cate their attitudes toward new technology to the junior members within the
                                 organization.
                                      A second major challenge in any design firm will be the changed composi-
                                 tion of staff with respect to skills. Because BIM most directly enhances produc-
                                 tivity for design documentation, the proportion of hours spent on any project
                                 shifts away from construction documentation. Within a typical practice, a
                                 designer skilled in BIM can realize the intention and detailing of a project with
                                 much less outside drawing or modeling support than was previously required.
                                 Details, material selections, and layouts only need to be defined once and can
                                 be propagated to all drawings where they will eventually be visible. As a result,
                                 the number of junior staff members working on construction documentation
                                 will be reduced. A good example of the way in which the workload for a project
                                 is shifting in an architectural practice that has already adopted BIM can be
                                 seen in Table 5-6. This data was reported by a principal architect at a large
                                 design firm (Birx 2005). While the total labor hours are reduced, the total
                                 cost did not change substantially due to a shift toward a more experienced
                                 labor staff.




c05.indd 202                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:29 PM
                                                                     5.6 New and Changed Staffing within Design Firms   203

               Table 5-6 Shifting demand for design skills on a typical project.
                                                   Project Hours

                Professional Grade            Pre-BIM        Post-BIM               Change

                Principal                        32                 32                 0%
                Project manager                 128                192                33%
                Project architect               192                320                40%
                Architect 1                     320                192               −67%
                Intern architect                320                96               −233%
                Total                           992                832               −19%




                    Although the need for entry-level architects is reduced, drawing cleanup,
               model detailing, and integration and coordination of multiple building subsys-
               tems will continue as important and valuable tasks.
                    BIM technology has new associated overhead costs beyond that of soft-
               ware investment. As firms already know, system management, often under the
               management of the Chief Information Officer (CIO), has become a crucial sup-
               port function for most firms. IT dependency expands as it supports greater
               productivity in the same way that electricity has become a necessity for most
               kinds of work. BIM inevitably adds to that dependency.
                    As design firms adopt BIM, they will need to assign responsibility for the
               two much-expanded roles that will be crucial to their success:
                    1) Systems Integrator—this function will be responsible for setting up
               exchange methods for BIM data with consultants inside and outside the firm.
               It also involves setup of libraries (as described in Section 2.2.4) and templates
               for company use. The applications may be limited to a single set that are used
               in every project or a variable set that is selected according to the type of project
               and the consultants involved.
                    2) Model Manager—while the protocols for version control and managing
               releases are well developed and understood within the drawing document-
               based world (whether paper or virtual), options are different and more open-
               ended with BIM. There may be a single master model or a set of federated
               ones. Since models are accessible 24/7, releases can potentially be made multi-
               ple times a day. As a result, the potential for model corruption exists. Because
               a project model is a high-value corporate product, maintaining its data integ-
               rity justifies explicit management. The model manager determines the policies
               to be followed for establishing read-and-update privileges, for merging con-
               sultants’ work and other data into a master model, and for managing model
               consistency across versions.




c05.indd 203                                                                                                            12/19/07 4:16:29 PM
          204 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers

                                     Dealing with model review and releases and managing the consistency of
                                 models will require special attention until a set of conventions becomes stand-
                                 ard. The model manager role must be assigned for each project.


                                      5.7 NEW CONTRACTUAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                          IN DESIGN

                                 Design services have traditionally been offered at a fee for services rendered,
                                 with the fee proportional to the costs of construction. The final set of construc-
                                 tion documents defines the design to the level needed for competitive bidding,
                                 cost estimation, and conveying “design intent.” Current AIA contract forms
                                 (AIA 1994) seek to limit the responsibility of the designer for actual construc-
                                 tion issues, placing that responsibility instead on the contractor. On the other
                                 hand, there have been some explorations by architects to provide facility man-
                                 agement and other downstream services in order to capture more of the value
                                 latent in architectural drawings (Demkin 2001).
                                      While there has been longstanding criticism of the architect’s standard fee
                                 structure (Stephens 2007), the advent of BIM provides what may possibly be
                                 the ultimate challenge to current business models. Current business models
                                 stipulate that the designers are responsible for design intent but not for provid-
                                 ing reliable construction information. This has led some contractors to develop
                                 entirely new building information models that are rebuilt in a separate BIM
                                 environment, essentially using the design model as an underlay. The new model
                                 serves as the reference model for construction, into which various fabrication-
                                 level models of separate building systems are integrated. This model, which
                                 must be checked and approved by the architect, is used for final coordination,
                                 fabrication, and construction.
                                      A well-known example of this type of arrangement is the Denver Art Museum
                                 designed by Daniel Libeskind and built by M.A. Mortenson. Interestingly, the
                                 contractor was the primary awardee of an American Institute of Architects prize
                                 for the Stellar Architecture BIM Award from the Technology in Architectural
                                 Practice Committee of the AIA in 2006. Libeskind’s design was represented as a
                                 form·Z model of the building geometry, which only represented design intent. Its
                                 geometry served as the basis for a structural steel model produced using Tekla
                                 Structures. A variety of additional models of different building subsystems were
                                 compiled in various other software packages and coordinated with the structural
                                 model using Naviswork’s Jetstream software.
                                      In contrast to this clean partition between design and fabrication and its
                                 obvious replication of modeling, there are examples of integrated models such




c05.indd 204                                                                                                    12/19/07 4:16:29 PM
                                                                           5.7 New Contractual Opportunities in Design   205

               as the Flint GM plant design by Ghafari and Associates, presented in the
               Chapter 9. In this case, a single model was used as the design coordination
               model, although fabrication models were developed in different systems to
               provide the specialist functionality needed for different types of fabrication.
                    In the Denver Art Museum, the value of the architectural model lay entirely
               with its expression of design intent, while the fabrication models dealt entirely with
               constructability, details of functional performance, construction costs and schedul-
               ing aspects. On the other hand, the GM engine plant design model included both
               the issues of design intent and also the issues of constructability, functional per-
               formance, costs and schedule. Thus the services provided in each case were very
               different, and justified different fee structures.
                    In addition to the extra services described in Section 5.4.1, design firms
               can offer other services in a BIM-driven construction environment, including:

                   • Calculate estimated facility operating costs (energy units) for final
                     design, or on a release-by-release basis.
                   • Prepare models appropriate for code reviews by authorities offering
                     BIM enabled code review.
                   • Provide model management services for the contractor so that the model
                     can be used for procurement, scheduling and other services of the con-
                     tractor’s choosing.
                   • Coordinate fabrication level systems for spatial configuration.
                   • Provide geometric detail information for CNC fabrication of specific
                     subsystems.
                   • Prepare performance metrics for building commissioning.
                   • Provide detailed as-built information models for facility management
                     and operations.

                    We encourage design firms to explicitly define the business and service
               model that they plan on carrying out with respect to each project by articulat-
               ing the services to be offered in such a way that the client gains a good under-
               standing of the scope of design services, including at what point the project
               ends and when responsibility is transferred to the contractors. Some of the dif-
               ferent forms of contracting are reviewed in Section 4.4.
                    Each new service option has its own requirements that must be identified
               carefully in terms of the scope and limits of that level of service. In addition, issues
               associated with legal liabilities must be considered. In summary, these types of
               services provide new options for leveraging BIM technology to enhance design
               value in construction and for generating additional revenue for designers.




c05.indd 205                                                                                                             12/19/07 4:16:30 PM
          206 Chapter 5 BIM for Architects and Engineers


                                    Chapter 5 Discussion Questions
                                               1. Thinking about the level of information needed for cost
                                                  estimation, scheduling and purchasing, outline your
                                                  recommendation regarding the level of detail that should be
                                                  defined in a design model. Consider and recommend what
                                                  the role of designers should be in supporting these activities.
                                               2. Other buildings built for the Beijing Olympics, beyond the
                                                  Aquatic Center, used BIM. Much information is available
                                                  on the Beijing Olympics and associated web sites. For
                                                  any one of the other buildings, review and report how the
                                                  design was carried out, and how information was carried
                                                  for fabrication and construction.
                                               3. Consider any specific type of building system, such as hung
                                                  ceiling systems, or an off-the–shelf curtainwall system. For that
                                                  system, identify how it could be supported by automation
                                                  tools for its custom adaptation to a particular project. How
                                                  could its fabrication be facilitated? Identify which levels of
                                                  automation are practical today and which not.
                                               4. Obtain the recommended set of details for installing a
                                                  manufactured door, window or skylight. Examine and
                                                  identify, using paper and pencil, the variations that might
                                                  apply the detail. List these variations as a specification for
                                                  what an automated parametric detailer needs to do.
                                               5. Propose a new service for a design firm, based on the
                                                  capabilities of BIM. Outline how the service would be of
                                                  value to the owner. Also outline a fee structure and the
                                                  logic behind that structure.
                                               6. Conceptual design is often undertaken in such non-
                                                  traditional BIM tools as form·Z or Maya. Lay out the
                                                  alternative design development process utilizing one of
                                                  these tools, in comparison to one of the new BIM tools.
                                                  Assess the costs and benefits of both development paths.




c05.indd 206                                                                                                     12/19/07 4:16:30 PM
               CHAPTER                       6
               BIM for the Construction Industry



                      6.0       EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                     tilizing BIM technology has major advantages for construction that save
               U     time and money. An accurate building model benefits all members of the
               project team. It allows for a smoother and better planned construction process
               that saves time and money and reduces the potential for errors and conflicts.
               This chapter explains how a contractor can obtain these benefits and what
               changes to construction processes are desirable.
                    Perhaps the most important point is that contractors must push for
               early involvement in construction projects, or seek out owners that require early
               participation. Contractors and owners should also include subcontractors and
               fabricators in their BIM efforts. The traditional design-bid-build approach lim-
               its the contractor’s ability to contribute their knowledge to the project during
               the design phase, when they can add significant value.
                    While some of the potential value of a contractor’s knowledge is lost after
               the design phase is complete, significant benefits to the contractor and the project
               team can still be realized by using a building model to support a variety of con-
               struction work processes. These benefits can ideally be achieved by developing a
               model in-house with the collaboration of subcontractors and fabricators; having
               a consultant develop a model is also possible.
                    The level of detail of the information in a building model depends on what
               functions it will be used for. For example, for accurate cost estimating, the
               model must be sufficiently detailed to provide the material quantities needed for
               cost evaluation. For 4D CAD schedule analysis, a less detailed model is adequate,

               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   207



c06.indd 207                                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:38:32 AM
          208 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                  but it must contain temporary works (scaffolding, excavation) and show how
                                  the construction will be phased (how deck pours will be made, etc.).
                                       One of the most important benefits is derived from close contractor coordi-
                                  nation that can be achieved when all of the major subcontractors participate in
                                  using the building model for detailing their portions of the work. This permits
                                  accurate clash detection and correction of clashes before they become problems
                                  in the field. It enables increased offsite prefabrication which reduces field cost
                                  and time and improves accuracy. Each of these uses of a building model is dis-
                                  cussed in detail and examples are illustrated in the case studies in Chapter 9.
                                       Any contractor that is contemplating the use of BIM technology should be
                                  aware that there is a significant learning curve. The transition from drawings
                                  to a building information model is not an easy one because almost every proc-
                                  ess and business relationship is subject to some change in order to exploit the
                                  opportunities offered by BIM. Clearly, it is important to plan these changes
                                  carefully and to obtain the assistance of consultants who can help guide the
                                  effort. At the end of the chapter we provide suggestions for making the transi-
                                  tion and identify what problems can be anticipated.
                                       In the absence of owner or designer-driven BIM efforts, it is vital that
                                  contractors establish leadership in the BIM process if they are to gain the
                                  advantages for their own organization and better position themselves to benefit
                                  from industry-wide BIM adoption.


                                       6.1 INTRODUCTION

                                  This chapter begins with a discussion of the various types of contractors and
                                  how BIM can provide benefits for their specific needs. It then goes into depth
                                  on important application areas that apply to most contractors. These include:

                                      • Clash detection
                                      • Quantity takeoff and cost estimating
                                      • Construction analysis and planning
                                      • Integration with cost and schedule control and other management
                                        functions
                                      • Offsite fabrication
                                      • Verification, guidance, and tracking of construction activities

                                      It follows with a discussion of the contractual and organizational changes
                                  that are needed to fully exploit the benefits that BIM offers. It concludes with
                                  some thoughts on how BIM can be implemented in a construction company.




c06.indd 208                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:38:33 AM
                                                                                                                   6.2 Types of Construction Firms               209

                                       6.2 TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION FIRMS

               There is a tremendous range of construction companies, from large companies
               that operate in many countries and offer a wide range of services to small com-
               panies that have individual owners who work on one project at a time and
               provide a highly specialized service. There are far more of the latter (small-scale
               companies) than the former, and they perform a surprisingly large percentage
               of the total construction volume. Data for 2004 is shown in Figure 6-1. It shows
               that a large percentage of firms were composed of just 1 to 19 people (91.6%),
               but a majority of construction employees worked in firms larger than 19 people
               (61.6%). A very small percentage of firms (0.12%) had over 500 workers, and
               they employed 13.6% of the workforce. Average firm size was 9 employees.
                    When we look at the building industry, the range of contractors is also very
               large in terms of the services they offer. The bulk of the industry consists of
               contractors who start with a successful bid, self-perform some of the work,
               and hire subcontractors for specialized services. Some contractors limit their
               service to managing the construction process. They hire subcontractors for all
               construction work. At the other end of the spectrum are design-build firms that
               take responsibility for both the design and construction processes but
               subcontract the bulk of the construction work. Almost all contractors end their
               responsibilities when construction is complete, but there are some that
               offer services in the turnover and management phases of the finished building



                                                            Percentage of Firms and Employees by Firm Size                                       FIGURE 6-1
                                                                  (Based on 2004 U.S. Census Data)                                               Distribution of 751,098
                                                                   Employees                   Firms                                             construction firms and
                                      2,500,000                                                                      400,000                     total employees by size
                                                                                                                                                 of firm for 2004.
                                                                                                                     350,000                     Source: US Census
                                      2,000,000
                                                                                                                     300,000                     Bureau, NAICS




                Number of Employees
                                                                                                                                                 23 – Construction.



                                                                                                                               Number of Firms
                                      1,500,000                                                                      250,000

                                                                                                                     200,000
                                      1,000,000                                                                      150,000

                                                                                                                     100,000
                                       500,000
                                                                                                                     50,000

                                             0                                                                        0
                                                  1    5    10    20   100    500   750 1,000 1,500 2,500 5,000 10,000+
                                                  to   to   to    to    to     to    to   to    to    to    to
                                                  4    9    19    99   499    749   999 1,499 2,499 4,999 9,999
                                                                               Firm Size




c06.indd 209                                                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:38:34 AM
          210 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                  (build-operate-maintain). Figure 6-2 shows the percentage of firms in each
                                  major sector of the construction industry in 2004. It shows that a majority of
                                  all firms fall in the specialty trade category (mainly small subcontractors).
                                        Home builders differ from most other construction companies in that
                                  they act as developers: buying the land and applying for zoning changes, plan-
                                  ning and constructing the infrastructure, and designing and building the
                                  homes that are sold. Home builders range in size from large public firms that
                                  build thousands of homes each year to individuals that build just one home at
                                  a time.
                                        Fabricators of components produced offsite function as a hybrid between
                                  manufacturers and contractors. Some fabricators, such as precast concrete manu-
                                  facturers, produce a range of standard products as well as custom items designed
                                  for a given project. Steel fabricators fall into the same category. A third group
                                  includes specialty fabricators that manufacture structural or decorative items
                                  from special steel, glass, wood, or other materials.
                                        Finally, there are many types of subcontractors that specialize in one area
                                  or type of work, such as electrical, plumbing, or mechanical detailing. The gen-
                                  eral contractor selects these subcontractors based on competitive bids or they
                                  are pre-selected based on previous business relationships that have demon-
                                  strated effective collaboration. The specialized construction knowledge of
                                  these subcontractors can be very valuable during design, and many of them
                                  perform design as well as construction services. The percentage of work done
                                  by subcontractors varies widely depending on the type of work and contract
                                  relationship.
                                        A typical project team organization is illustrated in Figure 6-3. There are
                                  many options for the organization of the project team. One is for the owner to
                                  hire a construction manager (CM), who then advises the owner or architect on


          FIGURE 6-2                                        Construction Firms by Type
          Percent of firms in                                Number and Percentage
          each major construc-
          tion sector, 2004.
          US Census Bureau,
                                                                            Building
          NAICS 23 –
                                                                            231,620
          Construction.                                                       31%
                                                       Specialty Trade
                                                          471,604
                                                            63%


                                                                                         Heavy/Civil
                                                                                         48,328
                                                                                         6%




c06.indd 210                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:38:35 AM
                                                                                               6.2 Types of Construction Firms    211

                                          Typical Organization of Project Team                                   FIGURE 6-3
                                                (single stage, traditional)                                      Typical organization
                                                                                                                 of a project team for a
                                                                                                                 building project.
                                                     Owner/Client




                                       Architect               General Contractor




                        Engineers and other
                                                    Subcontractors               Fabricators
                             designers



                                                                Building Product
                                                                    Suppliers




               the construction of the project but rarely assumes the risks associated with cost
               overruns.
                   The design-build (DB) firm is an important variation of the “typical”
               organization shown above (see Chapter 1 Section 1.1.2 for additional discus-
               sion of DB). The DB organization assumes responsibility for both design and
               construction. It serves as the single point of responsibility for nearly all
               problems associated with the project after an agreement has been reached on
               project scope and the total budget and schedule are established. The DB
               model reduces risk for the client because it eliminates disputes associated
               with determining which firm is responsible for design errors or construction
               problems. The use of BIM in a DB firm can be very advantageous because
               early integration of the project team is possible and expertise is available for
               building the model and sharing it with all team members. This important
               advantage, however, cannot be achieved if the DB firm is organized along
               traditional disciplines and the designers work with 2D or 3D CAD tools that
               produce drawings or other documents that are merely handed-off to the con-
               struction group when the design is complete. In this case, much of the value
               that BIM brings to the project is lost, because the building model must be cre-
               ated after the design is complete. While this can still provide some value (see
               discussion following), it overlooks one of the major benefits of BIM for a
               construction organization—the ability to overcome the lack of true integra-
               tion between design and construction. This lack of integration is the Achilles’
               heel of many projects.




c06.indd 211                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:38:35 AM
          212 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                       6.3 INFORMATION CONTRACTORS
                                           WANT FROM BIM

                                  Given the diversity of contractor types described above, it is not surprising that
                                  there is a wide range of processes and tools currently in use across the industry.
                                  Larger firms typically use computer-based systems for almost all of their key work
                                  processes, including: estimating, construction planning and scheduling, cost con-
                                  trol, accounting, procurement, supplier and vendor management, marketing, etc.
                                  For tasks related to the design, such as estimating, coordination and scheduling,
                                  paper plans and specifications are the typical starting point, even if the architect
                                  used 2D or 3D CAD systems for the design. These require contractors to manually
                                  perform quantity takeoffs to produce an accurate estimate and schedule, which is
                                  a time-consuming, tedious, error-prone and expensive process. For this reason,
                                  cost estimates, coordinated drawings, and detailed schedules are often not per-
                                  formed until late in the design process.
                                       Fortunately, this methodology is beginning to change, as contractors are
                                  recognizing the value of BIM for construction management. By using BIM tools,
                                  architects are potentially able to provide models that contractors can use for
                                  estimating, coordination, construction planning, fabrication, procurement, and
                                  other functions. At a minimum, the contractor can use this model to quickly add
                                  detailed information. To permit these capabilities, a building model would opti-
                                  mally provide contractors with the following types of information:

                                      • Detailed building information contained in an accurate 3D model
                                        that provides graphic views of a building’s components comparable
                                        to that shown in typical construction drawings and with the ability to
                                        extract quantity and component property information.
                                      • Temporary components to represent equipment, formwork and other
                                        temporary components that are critical to the sequencing and planning
                                        of the project.
                                      • Specification information associated with each building component
                                        with links to textual specifications for every component that the contrac-
                                        tor must purchase or construct.
                                      • Analysis data related to performance levels and project requirements
                                        such as structural loads, connection reactions and maximum expected
                                        moments and shear, heating and cooling loads for tonnage of HVAC
                                        systems, targeted luminance levels, etc. This data is for fabrication and
                                        MEP detailing.
                                      • Design and construction status of each component to track and
                                        validate the progress of components relative to design, procurement,




c06.indd 212                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:38:36 AM
                                                   6.4 Processes to Develop a Contractor Building Information Model   213

                     installation, and testing (if relevant). This data is added to the model by
                     the contractor.

                    No BIM tool today comes close to satisfying this list of requirements, but
               this list serves to identify the information needs for future BIM implementa-
               tions. Today, most BIM tools support the creation of information in the first
               and second items in the list.
                    An accurate, computable, and relatively complete building model that
               includes the above information is needed to support critical contractor work
               processes for estimating, coordinating trades and building systems, fabricating
               components offsite, and construction planning. It is important to note that
               each new work process often requires that the contractor add information to
               the model, since the architect or engineer would not traditionally include
               means and methods information such as equipment or production rates, which
               are critical for estimating, scheduling and procurement. Contractors use the
               building model to provide a base structure to extract information and will add
               construction-specific information as-needed to support various construction
               work processes.
                    Additionally, if the scope of work for the contractor includes turnover or
               operations of the facility, links between BIM components and owner control
               systems, such as maintenance or facility management, will facilitate the hand-
               over process to the owner at the end of the project. The building model needs
               to support representation of information related to all of these processes.


                    6.4 PROCESSES TO DEVELOP A CONTRACTOR
                        BUILDING INFORMATION MODEL

               While use of BIM technology is increasing rapidly, it is in the early stages of
               implementation and contractors are now utilizing many different approaches to
               leverage this new technology. Most design teams are not creating models for
               every project, which has led to contractors taking ownership of the modeling
               process. Even when architectural use of BIM becomes commonplace, contrac-
               tors will need to model additional components and add construction-specific
               information to make building models useful to them. Consequently, many leading-
               edge contractors are creating their own building models from scratch to support
               estimating, 4D CAD, procurement, etc. Figure 6-4 shows a common workflow of
               a contractor creating a building information model from 2D paper drawings.
                    Note that, in some cases, the contractor is building a 3D model that is only
               a visual representation of the project. It does not contain parametric compo-
               nents or relations between them. In these cases, use of the model is limited to




c06.indd 213                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:38:36 AM
          214 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

          FIGURE 6-4
          BIM process flow for
          a project where the                                                                     visualizations for owner
          contractor builds the                                                    3D model       and project stakeholders
          construction model
          from 2D drawings and
          then uses it for quanti-     2D paper                                                    construction planning
          ty takeoff, construction     drawings                                                       and scheduling
                                     from design/       contractor or consultant   3D model/
          planning, and clash
                                     engineering          builds/updates BIM         BIM
          detection.                     team
                                                                                                     trade coordination



                                                                                     BIM
                                                                                                     quantity takeoff




                                     clash detection, visualization, and visual planning, such as 4D, because the
                                     3D model does not define discrete quantifiable components to support quantity
                                     takeoff or trade coordination. In other cases, contractors may build a hybrid
                                     3D/parametric model that includes some BIM components, which enable some
                                     coordination and quantity takeoff. When contractors do produce a full build-
                                     ing model, they can leverage it for multiple purposes.
                                           Another approach for implementing BIM is illustrated in Figure 6-5. In this
                                     case, the project team collaborates on a model – 3D, BIM, or hybrid – in an
                                     environment that is suited to their practice. Alternatively, if a specific organiza-
                                     tion works in 2D, the contractor or consultant can convert the 2D to 3D/BIM
                                     so that their work can be entered into the shared model. Typically, the contrac-
                                     tor or the consultant manages the integration of these various models, which
                                     are developed independently by different members of the project team but then
                                     merged into a collaborative model. The shared model can be used by the project
                                     team for coordination, planning, quantity takeoff, and other functions. While
                                     this approach does not take advantage of all the tools that a full-featured build-
                                     ing information model supports, it does reduce costs and time compared to
                                     traditional practices. The shared 3D model becomes the basis for all construc-
                                     tion activity and allows for much greater accuracy than 2D drawings.
                                           As the practice and use of BIM increases, new processes will evolve.
                                     The case studies in Chapter 9 highlight a variety of ways in which contractors
                                     are adapting their work process to leverage BIM. In the following sections, we
                                     discuss specific modeling processes.
                                           Home builders provide a good example of how a design-build effort can ben-
                                     efit from the use of BIM technology. When developing designs for model homes,




c06.indd 214                                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:38:37 AM
                                                           6.4 Processes to Develop a Contractor Building Information Model      215

                                                                                                                  FIGURE 6-5
                                                                                          visualizations for      Process flow for a
                     3D/BIM                                                              owner and project
                                                                                                                  project, where the
                   models from                                                               stakeholders
                                                                                                                  architect and other
                   project team
                                                                                                                  designers and sub
                                                                                            construction
                     2D paper                                                                planning             contractors use 3D
                     drawings      contractor or    contractor or                          and scheduling         modeling tools (or
                   from design/     consultant       consultant      shared 3D/
                   engineering        builds/        integrates      BIM model                                    have a consultant
                       team       updates model        models                                                     develop a 3D model
                                                                                         trade coordination       from 2D drawings) and
                                                                                                                  contribute to a shared
                                                                                                                  3D model.
                                                                                           quantity takeoff




               a building information model can provide rapid feedback on the quantity and cost
               implications of a design change. When a buyer requests design modifications to a
               model home, this capability can provide fast visual and cost feedback and allow
               the prospective buyer to quickly reach an agreement with the builder. This kind
               of rapid response to clients’ needs is of great value, especially for construction
               companies that provide customized building options based on systematic meth-
               ods of construction†.
                    4D CAD tools allow the contractor to simulate and evaluate the planned
               construction sequence and share it with others in the project team. Objects in
               the building model should be grouped according to the phases of construction
               and linked to appropriate activities in a project schedule. For example, if a con-
               crete deck will be placed in three pours, then the deck must be detailed into
               three sections so that this sequence can be planned and illustrated. This applies
               to all objects needed for these three pours: concrete, steel, embeds, etc. In
               addition, the excavation areas and temporary structures such as scaffolding and
               lay-down areas should be included in the model. This is a key reason why con-
               tractor knowledge is beneficial when defining a building model. If the model is
               built by the architect or the contractor while the building is still being designed,
               the contractor can provide rapid feedback regarding constructability, sequenc-
               ing, and estimated construction cost. Early integration of this information is of
               great benefit to the architect and owner.

               †
                Three examples are the high-tech office buildings provided by the Beck Group, small scale steel
               buildings provided by <<http://www.butlermfg.com/steel_bld_ctr/>> or <<http://
               www.steelbuildings.com>> and precast parking structures designed, manufactured and built
               by Finfrock. Each of these companies has developed sophisticated BIM applications integrated
               with cost-estimating systems. The trend they represent, exploiting BIM to provide a competitive
               advantage by providing customized but yet ‘off-the-shelf ’ buildings, is detailed in Chapter 7.




c06.indd 215                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:38:37 AM
          216 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                       6.5 REDUCTION OF DESIGN ERRORS USING
                                           CLASH DETECTION

                                  A critical work process for any contractor is trade and system coordination.
                                  Today, most clash detection is performed manually by overlaying individual
                                  system drawings on a light table to identify potential conflicts. Similarly, con-
                                  tractors use traditional 2D-CAD tools to overlay CAD layers to visually and
                                  manually identify potential conflicts. These manual approaches are slow, costly,
                                  prone to error, and depend on the use of up-to-date drawings. To overcome
                                  these problems, some organizations use custom-written applications for
                                  automatically detecting clashes between drawing entities on different layers.
                                  Automatic detection of conflicts is an excellent method for identifying design
                                  errors, where objects either occupy the same space (a hard clash) or are so close
                                  (a soft clash) that there is insufficient space for access, insulation, safety, etc. In
                                  some publications, the term ‘clearance clash’ is used instead of ‘soft clash’. The
                                  terms are synonymous.
                                       BIM-based clash detection provides many advantages over traditional 2D
                                  coordination methods like overlays on a light table or automated 3D checks.
                                  Use of a light table is time consuming, error prone and requires that all drawings
                                  be current. 3D clash detection relies on 3D geometry models for identifying
                                  geometric entities often return a large number of meaningless clashes. Second,
                                  if the 3D geometries are not solids. the clash detection tool cannot detect clashes
                                  between objects within other objects. It can only detect clashes between sur-
                                  faces. Furthermore, qualification of clashes into meaningful categories for the
                                  contractor is greatly inhibited due to lack of semantic information embedded in
                                  the 3D geometry models. A clash between surfaces could be a wall abutting a
                                  wall or a pipe running through a wall. The contractor has to verify and review
                                  each of these potential clashes.
                                       In contrast, BIM-based clash detection tools allow automatic geometry-
                                  based clash detection to be combined with semantic and rule-based clash analysis
                                  for identifying qualified and structured clashes. BIM-based clash detection tools
                                  allow contractors to selectively check clashes between specified systems, such
                                  as checking for clashes between mechanical and structural systems, because
                                  each component in the model is associated with a specific type of system. Conse-
                                  quently, the clash detection process can be performed at any level of detail and
                                  across any number of building systems and trades. A BIM-based clash detection
                                  system can also utilize these component classifications to more readily perform
                                  soft clash analyses. For example, the contractor can search for conditions in
                                  which the clearance or space between mechanical components and the sub-floor
                                  is less than two feet. These types of clash detection analyses are only possible
                                  with well-defined and structured building models.




c06.indd 216                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:38:38 AM
                                                                 6.5 Reduction of Design Errors Using Clash Detection   217

                     Regardless of the model’s accuracy, the contractor must ensure that the
               building is modeled with an appropriate level of detail. It must have sufficient
               details for piping, ducts, structural steel and attachments, and other compo-
               nents, so that clashes can be accurately detected. If the detailing is inaccurate, a
               significant number of problems will not be found until the building is con-
               structed, at which time they could be costly and time consuming to resolve.
               Proper detailing of the model by subcontractors or other project team members
               responsible for the design of these systems is required. These subcontractors
               need to participate in the model development process as early as possible. Ide-
               ally, resolution would take place in a common project site office, where a large
               monitor can be used to display each problem area and each discipline can con-
               tribute their expertise to the solution. Agreed upon changes can then be entered
               into the appropriate design model prior to the next clash detection cycle.
               Figure 6-6 shows a snapshot of two employees from the contractor and subcon-
               tractor using a building information model to support MEP coordination. This
               was done in a trailer at the job site. The case study of the Camino Group Medical
               Building in Chapter 9 is a good example of early subcontractor participation in
               detailing a 3D model used for clash detection and other functions.
                     There are two predominant types of clash detection technologies available in
               the marketplace: 1) clash detection with BIM design tools and 2) BIM integration
               tools that perform clash detection. All major BIM design tools include some


                                                                                                        FIGURE 6-6
                                                                                                        Snapshot of
                                                                                                        contractors and
                                                                                                        subcontractor using a
                                                                                                        building information
                                                                                                        model to support MEP
                                                                                                        coordination.
                                                                                                        Courtesy of Swinerton,
                                                                                                        Inc.




c06.indd 217                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:38:38 AM
          218 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                  clash detection features that allow the designer to check for clashes during the
                                  design phase. But the contractor often needs to integrate these models and may
                                  or may not be able to do so successfully within the BIM authoring tool due to
                                  poor interoperability or the number and complexity of objects.
                                      The second class of clash detection technologies can be found in BIM inte-
                                  gration tools. These tools allow users to import 3D models from a wide variety
                                  of modeling applications and visualize the integrated model. Examples of this
                                  are Navisworks’ JetStream package (Navisworks 2007) and Solibri Model
                                  Checker (Solibri 2007). The clash detection analyses that these tools provide
                                  tend to be more sophisticated, and they are capable of identifying more types
                                  of soft and hard clashes. The drawback is that identified clashes cannot be
                                  fixed immediately because the integrated model is not directly associated with
                                  the original model. In other words, the information flow is one-way and not
                                  bi-directional. An exception to this statement is the Solibri Model Checker and
                                  Issue Locator which do have the ability to provide feedback in the originating
                                  building model for Architectural Desktop (from Autodesk) and ArchiCAD
                                  (from Graphisoft). These changes must also be introduced into the originating
                                  systems or upstream modeling tools. Then new files are generated when the
                                  integrated model is updated and a new clash detection analysis is performed.
                                  The updating process can cause errors and delays that must be further coordi-
                                  nated through careful file management among the project team.



                                       6.6 QUANTITY TAKEOFF AND COST ESTIMATING

                                  There are many types of estimates that can be developed during the design
                                  process. These range from approximate values early in the design to more pre-
                                  cise values after the design is complete. Clearly, it is undesirable to wait until the
                                  end of the design phase to develop a cost estimate. If the project is over budget
                                  after the design is complete, there are only two options: cancel the project or
                                  apply value engineering to cut costs and possibly quality. As the design
                                  progresses, interim estimates help to identify problems early so that alternatives
                                  can be considered. This process allows the designer and owner to make more
                                  informed decisions, resulting in higher quality construction that meets cost con-
                                  straints. Just as significant, using a BIM approach can reduce the time needed to
                                  achieve a high quality building by improving design and construction collabora-
                                  tion and accuracy.
                                       During the early design phase, the only quantities available for estimating
                                  are those associated with areas and volumes, such as types of space, perimeter




c06.indd 218                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:38:41 AM
                                                                             6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating   219

               lengths, etc. These quantities might be adequate for what is called a parametric
               cost estimate, which is calculated based on major building parameters. The
               parameters used depend on the building type, e.g., number of parking spaces
               and floors for a parking garage, number and area of each type of commercial
               space, number of floors, quality level of materials for a commercial building,
               location of building, etc. Unfortunately these quantities are not generally avail-
               able in early design packages (such as SketchUp), because they do not define
               object types, such as those created by a BIM package. Therefore, it is important
               to move the early design model into BIM software to allow for quantity extrac-
               tions and approximate cost estimates. An example of this type of system is the
               DProfiler modeling and estimating system from Beck Technology (see addi-
               tional description of this system in Chapter 4 and the Hillwood Commercial
               Project case study in Chapter 9).
                   As the design matures, it is possible to rapidly extract more detailed spatial
               and material quantities directly from the building model. All BIM tools provide
               capabilities for extracting counts of components, area and volume of spaces,
               material quantities, and to report these in various schedules. These quantities
               are more than adequate for producing approximate cost estimates. For more
               accurate cost estimates prepared by contractors, problems may arise when the
               definitions of components (typically assemblies of parts) are not properly
               defined and are not capable of extracting the quantities needed for cost esti-
               mating. For example, BIM software might provide the linear feet of concrete
               footings but not the quantity of reinforcing steel embedded in the concrete; or
               the area of interior partition walls but not the quantity of studs in the walls.
               These are problems that can be addressed, but the approach depends on the
               specific BIM tool and associated estimating system.
                   It should be noted that while building models provide adequate measure-
               ments for quantity takeoffs, they are not a replacement for estimating. Estimators
               perform a critical role in the building process far beyond that of extracting counts
               and measurements. The process of estimating involves assessing conditions in
               the project that impact cost, such as unusual wall conditions, unique assemblies,
               and difficult access conditions. Automatic identification of these conditions by
               any BIM tool is not yet feasible. Estimators should consider using BIM technol-
               ogy to facilitate the laborious task of quantity takeoff and to quickly visualize,
               identify, and assess conditions, and provide more time to optimize prices from
               subcontractors and suppliers. A detailed building model is a risk-mitigation tool
               for estimators that can significantly reduce bid costs, because it reduces the
               uncertainty associated with material quantities. The One Island East Office Tower
               case study in Chapter 9 is an excellent example of this.




c06.indd 219                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:38:42 AM
          220 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                      Estimators utilize a variety of options to leverage BIM for quantity takeoff
                                  and to support the estimating process. No BIM tool provides the full
                                  capabilities of a spreadsheet or estimating package, so estimators must identify
                                  a method that works best for their specific estimating process. Three primary
                                  options are:

                                      1. Export building object quantities to estimating software
                                      2. Link the BIM tool directly to the estimating software
                                      3. Use a BIM quantity takeoff tool

                                      Each of these options is discussed in detail below.

                                  6.6.1 Export Quantities to Estimating Software
                                  As previously noted, most BIM tools offered by software vendors include fea-
                                  tures for extracting and quantifying BIM component properties. These features
                                  also include tools to export quantity data to a spreadsheet or an external data-
                                  base. In the U.S. alone, there are over 100 commercial estimating packages
                                  and many are specific to the type of work estimated. At the present time, how-
                                  ever, surveys show that MS Excel is the most commonly used estimating tool
                                  (Sawyer and Grogan 2002). For many estimators, the capability to extract and
                                  associate quantity takeoff data using custom Excel spreadsheets is often suffi-
                                  cient. This approach, however, may require significant setup and adoption of
                                  a standardized modeling process.

                                  6.6.2 Directly Link BIM Components to Estimating Software
                                  The second alternative is to use a BIM tool that is capable of linking directly to
                                  an estimating package via a plug-in or third-party tool. Many of the larger esti-
                                  mating software packages now offer plug-ins to various BIM tools. These
                                  include: Sage Timberline via Innovaya (Innovaya 2007), U.S. Cost (Rundell
                                  2006; U.S.Cost 2007); and Graphisoft Estimator (VICO 2007). These tools
                                  allow the estimator to associate components in the building model directly
                                  with assemblies, recipes, or items in the estimating package. These assemblies
                                  or recipes define what steps and resources are needed for construction of the
                                  components on site or for the erection or installation of prefabricated compo-
                                  nents. Assemblies or recipes often include references to the activities needed
                                  for the construction, e.g., form, place rebar, place concrete, cure, and strip
                                  forms. The estimator is able to use rules to calculate quantities for these
                                  items based on the component properties or manually enter data not extracted
                                  from the building information model. The assemblies may also include items
                                  representing necessary resources such as labor, equipment, materials, etc. and




c06.indd 220                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:38:42 AM
                                                                             6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating   221

               associated time and cost expenditures. As a result, all information required to
               develop a complete cost estimate and detailed list of basic activities can be
               used for construction planning. If this information is related to the BIM
               components, it can be used to generate a 4D model. The graphic model can
               also be linked to the estimate to illustrate the model objects associated with
               each line item within that estimate. This is very helpful for spotting objects that
               have no cost estimate associated with them.
                    This approach works well for contractors who have standardized on a specific
               estimating package and BIM tool. Integrating BIM component information
               from subcontractors and various trades, however, may be difficult to manage if
               different BIM tools are used. There are clear benefits to this highly integrated
               approach, but one potential shortcoming is the need for the contractor to
               develop a separate model. Of course, if the architect is not using BIM, then a
               contractor model is a necessity. When this is not the case, it is more efficient for
               the designer’s model to provide the starting point for the contractor once the
               team has agreed on component definitions. If the project team is standardized
               on a single software vendor platform, this method may be suitable. This requires
               either a design-build approach or a contract that integrates the main project
               participants from the beginning of the project. Once again, early integration
               and collaboration are the keys to effective use of BIM technology. The AGC
               “BIM Guidelines for Contractors” emphasizes this point (see discussion in 6.8
               below).

               6.6.3 Quantity Takeoff Tool
               A third alternative, shown generically in Figure 6-7, is to use a specialized
               quantity takeoff tool that imports data from various BIM tools. This allows
               estimators to use a takeoff tool specifically designed for their needs without
               having to learn all of the features contained within a given BIM tool. Exam-
               ples of these are: Exactal (Exactal 2007), Innovaya (Innovaya 2007), and
               OnCenter (OnCenter 2007). These tools typically include specific features
               that link directly to items and assemblies, annotate the model for ‘condi-
               tions,’ and create visual takeoff diagrams. These tools offer varying levels of
               support for automated extraction and manual takeoff features. Estimators
               will need to use a combination of both manual tools and automatic features
               to support the wide range of takeoff and condition checking they need to
               perform.
                    Additional changes to the building model require that any new objects be
               linked to proper estimating tasks so that accurate cost estimates can be obtained
               from the building model, depending on the accuracy and level of detail already
               modeled.




c06.indd 221                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:38:43 AM
          222 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                                                                                     Estimating Software
                                       2D paper
                                       drawings
                                     from design/          manual takeoff and     manually associate
                                                            manual check for    takeoff information with             manual link, changes must
                                      engineering                                                                     be updated by estimator
                                         team                “conditions”           assembly items
                                                                                                                      digital links, changes are
                                                                                                                       updated automatically

                                                                                   associate digitized
                                                                                takeoff information with
                                                                                component ‘assemblies’,            cost
                                     Traditional paper-based                            ‘recipes’                database
                                     estimating process

                                                                                                               calculation of
                                                         extract quantities        associate with                additional
                                                                                                                                           estimate
                                                          within BIM tool          assembly items              quantities item
                                                                                                                 properties
                                     3D/BIM
                                                          manually extract
                                   models from
                                                           quantities with
                                   project team
                                                         specialized takeoff/                                    supplier/
                                                           estimating tool                                     subcontractor
                                                                                  auto-extract and
                                                                                   associate with                 pricing
                                   3D/BIM-based estimating                         assembly items
                                   process

                                  FIGURE 6-7        Conceptual diagram of a BIM quantity takeoff and estimating process.




                                  6.6.4 Guidelines and BIM Implementation Issues to Support
                                        Quantity Takeoff and Estimating
                                  Estimators and contractors should understand how BIM can support specific
                                  estimating tasks by reducing errors and improving accuracy and reliability
                                  within the estimate. More importantly, they can benefit from the ability to
                                  respond rapidly to changes during critical phases of the project, a challenge
                                  many estimators face on a daily basis. Here are some guidelines to consider:

                                       • BIM is only a starting point for estimating. No tool can deliver a full
                                         estimate automatically from a building model. If a vendor advertises
                                         this, they don’t understand the estimating process. Figure 6-8 illustrates
                                         that a building model can provide only a small part of the information
                                         needed for a cost estimate (material quantities and assembly names).
                                         The remaining data comes either from rules or manual entries provided
                                         by a cost estimator.
                                       • Start simple. If you are estimating with traditional and manual processes,
                                         first move to digitizers or on-screen takeoff to adjust to digital takeoff
                                         methods. As estimators gain confidence and comfort with digital
                                         takeoff, consider moving to a BIM-based takeoff.
                                       • Start by counting. The easiest place to start is estimating the tasks that
                                         involve counting, such as doors, windows, and plumbing fixtures. Many




c06.indd 222                                                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:38:43 AM
                                                                                       6.6 Quantity Takeoff and Cost Estimating   223




               FIGURE 6-8 Example of how BIM component definitions relate to estimating assembly items
               and recipes.
               It’s important to note that BIM provides only a subset of the information estimators need to com-
               pute cost, and BIM components provide takeoff information but often lack the detailed capability
               of automatically computing labor, job (non-permanent) material and equipment costs.

                       BIM tools provide scheduling functionality and simple functions to
                       query and count specific types of components, blocks, or other entities.
                       These can also be verified and validated.
                    • Start in one tool, and then move to an integrative process. It’s easi-
                      est to start by doing takeoff in the BIM software or a specialized takeoff
                      application. This limits potential errors or issues with respect to translat-
                      ing data and moving model data from one application to another. Once
                      the estimator is confident that the data provided by a single software
                      package is accurate and valid, then the model’s data can be transferred
                      to a secondary takeoff tool for validation.
                    • Set expectations. The level of detail in the BIM takeoff is a reflec-
                      tion of the level of detail in the overall building model. If rebar isn’t
                      included in the building model, these values won’t be auto-calculated.
                      The estimator needs to understand the scope of the model information
                      and what is represented.
                    • Start with a single trade or component type and work out the kinks.
                    • Automation begins with standardization. To fully leverage BIM,
                      designers and estimators will need to coordinate methods to stand-
                      ardize building components and the attributes associated with those
                      components for quantity takeoff. In addition, in order to generate accu-
                      rate quantities of sub components and assemblies, such as the studs
                      inside a wall, it is necessary to develop standards for these assemblies.




c06.indd 223                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:38:44 AM
          224 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                       6.7 CONSTRUCTION ANALYSIS AND PLANNING

                                  Construction planning and scheduling involves sequencing activities in space
                                  and time, considering procurement, resources, spatial constraints, and other
                                  concerns in the process. Traditionally, bar charts were used to plan projects but
                                  were unable to show how or why certain activities were linked in a given sequence;
                                  nor could they calculate the longest (critical) path to complete a project. Today,
                                  schedulers typically use Critical Path Method (CPM) scheduling software such as
                                  Microsoft Project, Primavera SureTrak, or P3 to create, update, and communi-
                                  cate the schedule using a wide variety of reports and displays. These systems
                                  show how activities are linked and allow for the calculation of critical path(s)
                                  and float values that improve scheduling during a project. Specialized software
                                  packages that are better suited to building construction, such as Vico Control,
                                  enable schedulers to do line-of-balance scheduling. Sophisticated planning meth-
                                  ods for resource-based analysis, including resource-leveling and scheduling with
                                  consideration of uncertainty, such as Monte Carlo simulation, are also available
                                  in some of the off-the-shelf packages. Other software tools are available for
                                  detailed schedules for a short time period of one or two weeks that need to con-
                                  sider individual subs, the availability of materials, etc.
                                       Traditional methods, however, do not adequately capture the spatial compo-
                                  nents related to these activities, nor do they link directly to the design or building
                                  model. Scheduling is therefore a manually intensive task, and it often remains out-
                                  of-sync with the design and creates difficulties for project stakeholders to easily
                                  understand the schedule and its impact on site logistics. Figure 6-9 shows a tradi-
                                  tional Gantt chart which illustrates how difficult it is to evaluate the construction
                                  implications of this type of schedule display. Only people thoroughly familiar with
                                  the project and how it will be constructed can determine whether this schedule is
                                  feasible. Two types of technologies have evolved to address these shortcomings.
                                       The first is 4D CAD, which refers to 3D models that also contain time asso-
                                  ciations. 4D CAD tools allow schedulers to visually plan and communicate
                                  activities in the context of space and time. 4D animations are movies or virtual
                                  simulations of the schedule.
                                       The second approach is to use analysis tools that incorporate BIM
                                  components and construction method information to optimize activity sequenc-
                                  ing. These tools incorporate spatial, resource utilization, and productivity
                                  information. These two approaches are discussed in the following sections.

                                  6.7.1 4D models to support construction planning
                                  4D models and tools were initially developed in the late 1980s by large
                                  organizations involved in constructing complex infrastructure, power, and
                                  process projects in which schedule delays or errors impacted cost. As the AEC




c06.indd 224                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:38:45 AM
                                                                                             6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning   225




               FIGURE 6-9 Sample Gantt chart of a construction schedule for a project involving three
               buildings and multiple floors and areas.
               Assessing the feasibility or quality of a schedule based on a Gantt chart is often difficult for many
               project participants and requires manually associating each activity with areas or components in
               the project since there are no visual associations with the referenced areas, such as “Area 10” to
               a drawing or diagram.


               industry adopted 3D tools, construction organizations built manual 4D mod-
               els and combined snapshots of each phase or period of time in the project.
               Custom and commercial tools evolved in the mid to late 1990s, facilitating the
               process by manually creating 4D models with automatic links to 3D geometry,
               entities, or groups of entities for construction activities (see Figures 6-10,
               6-11 and 6-12). BIM allows schedulers to create, review, and edit 4D models
               more frequently, which has lead to the implementation of better and more
               reliable schedules. The following sections discuss the benefits of 4D models
               and the various options schedulers have when producing them.

               6.7.2 Benefits of 4D Models
               4D simulations function primarily as communication tools for revealing poten-
               tial bottlenecks and as a method for improving collaboration. Contractors can
               review 4D simulations to ensure that the plan is feasible and efficient as
               possible. The benefits of 4D models are:

                    • Communication: Planners can visually communicate the planned con-
                      struction process to all project stakeholders. The 4D model captures
                      both the temporal and spatial aspects of a schedule and communicates
                      this schedule more effectively than a traditional Gantt chart.




c06.indd 225                                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:38:45 AM
          226 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

          FIGURE 6-10
          4D view of construction
          of Vancouver
          Convention Center
          showing foundation
          and structural steel
          erection.
          A tower crane was
          included in the model
          to review crane reach,
          clearances and conflicts.
          (See color insert for full
          color figure.) Courtesy
          Pacific Project Systems
          Inc., MTC Design/3D,
          (4D modeling);
          Musson Cattell
          Mackey Partnership,
          Downs/Archambault
          & Partners, LMN
          Architects (architects);
          Glotman Simpson
          Consulting Engineers
          (structural engineers);
          PCL Constructors
          Westcoast Inc (CM)




                                           • Multiple stakeholder input: 4D models are often used in community
                                             forums to present to laypersons how a project might impact traffic,
                                             access to a hospital, or other critical community concerns.
                                           • Site logistics: Planners can manage laydown areas, access to and within
                                             the site, location of large equipment, trailers, etc.
                                           • Trade coordination: Planners can coordinate the expected time and
                                             space flow of trades on the site as well as the coordination of work in
                                             small spaces.
                                           • Compare schedules and track construction progress: Project mana-
                                             gers can compare different schedules easily, and they can quickly iden-
                                             tify whether the project is on track or behind schedule.

                                            Above all, 4D CAD requires that an appropriate 3D model of the building
                                       be linked to a project schedule that, in turn, provides start and end dates and
                                       floats for each object. There are a number of systems that provide these linkage
                                       capabilities.
                                            The above considerations make the use of 4D CAD a relatively expensive
                                       process to setup and manage during a project. Prior experience and knowledge of




c06.indd 226                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:38:46 AM
                                                                                     6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning   227




               FIGURE 6-11 A snapshot of a 4D model and photos from the project site.
               The project team used the model to support zone management and plan concurrent activities of
               foundation and concrete work. While a 4D model supports communication of sequencing of such
               work, the model did not include formwork and other temporary components which do impact the
               ability to perform work in the field. Courtesy of DPR Construction.




               FIGURE 6-12 4D snapshots of a campus wide project showing various construction activities
               occurring throughout the campus to both landscape, road, and facilities.
               These images help a contractor to communicate with the owner and the campus community
               about impacts to parking, roads, and access to specific buildings. Courtesy of DPR
               Construction.


               the level of detail needed to produce an accurate linked schedule are necessary to
               achieve the full benefits associated with this tool. When used properly however,
               the associated cost and time benefits have been found to far exceed the initial
               implementation cost. For a good example, see the Camino Group Medical Build-
               ing case study in Chapter 9. On this project 4D CAD analysis showed that it




c06.indd 227                                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:38:47 AM
          228 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                  would be necessary to build the office building before the garage in order to have
                                  adequate access to the building site. This had not been realized when the project
                                  started and required a restructuring of the design and construction process.

                                  6.7.3 4D Modeling Processes
                                  Similar to the options estimators have, schedulers can choose from a variety of
                                  tools and processes to build 4D models:

                                      1. Manual method using 3D or 2D tools
                                      2. Built-in 4D features in a 3D or BIM tool
                                      3. Export 3D/BIM to 4D tool and import schedule


                                  Manual, CAD -Based Methods
                                  Construction planners have been building 4D models manually for decades using
                                  colored pencils and drawings, with different colors for different sequences to
                                  show the progression of work over time. With the advent of CAD, planners trans-
                                  ferred this process to CAD drawings that utilize colored-fills, shading, and the
                                  ability to turn CAD entities on and off. In some cases, where the model included
                                  naming conventions or component attributes related to the construction schedule,
                                  the process could be automated. In most cases, planners worked with a third party
                                  to create high-end movies or rendered animations to visually demonstrate the
                                  schedule. These animations are visually appealing and a great marketing tool, but
                                  they are not adequate planning or scheduling tools. Because they are produced
                                  manually, it remains difficult to change, update, or do rapid real-time scenario
                                  planning. When the schedule’s details change, the planner must re-synchronize
                                  the 4D image manually with the schedule and create a new set of snapshots or
                                  animations. Because of these manual update requirements, the use of these
                                  tools is normally limited to the initial stages of design when visualization of the
                                  construction process is desired for the client or some outside agency.

                                  BIM Tools with 4D capability
                                  One way to generate 4D snapshots is through features that automate filtering of
                                  objects in a view based on an object property or parameter. For example, in Revit
                                  each object can be assigned to a ‘phase’ that is entered as text, such as “June 07”
                                  or “existing” and order these phases as desired. Users can then apply filters to
                                  show all objects in a specified phase or previous phases. This type of 4D function-
                                  ality is relevant for basic phasing and generation of 4D snapshots but does not
                                  provide direct integration with schedule data. Additionally, features to interac-
                                  tively playback a 4D model common in specialized 4D tools are not provided.




c06.indd 228                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:38:49 AM
                                                                                        6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning   229

                    Most BIM tools don’t have built-in ‘date’ or ‘time’ capabilities, and require
               specific 4D modules or add-on tools to directly link to schedule data. Table 6-1
               provides a brief overview of both built-in 4D features and add-on 4D functional-
               ity available for the popular BIM tools.
                    Due to the shortcomings inherent in manual and CAD/BIM-based 4D mod-
               eling tools, several software vendors began offering specialized 4D tools for
               producing 4D models from 3D models and schedules. These tools facilitate the
               production and editing of 4D models and provide the scheduler with numerous
               features for customizing and automating production of the 4D model. Typically,
               these tools require that data from a 3D model be imported from a CAD or BIM
               application. In most cases, the extracted data is limited to geometry and a min-
               imal set of entity or component properties, such as ‘name’, ‘color ’, and a group
               or hierarchy level. The scheduler imports relevant data into the 4D tool, then
               ‘links’ these components to construction activities, and associates them with
               types or visual behaviors. Figure 6-13 illustrates two approaches to creating the
               4D model. The top part shows how a series of snapshots of the construction
               process can be created from 2D drawings. The lower portion illustrates how a
               true 4D model can be created from a 3D model linked to a construction sched-
               ule using specialized 4D software. Figure 6-14 shows the types of data sets that
               are used by 4D software to generate the 4D model.

               Table 6-1 Selected BIM tools with 4D capability
               Company        Product                 Remarks

               Bentley        ProjectWise Navigator   See Bentley in table 6-2 below
               Autodesk       Revit Architecture      Revit is the only BIM tool with some built-in 4D capability
                                                      for basic 4D phasing. Each Revit object includes param-
                                                      eters for “phasing” that allow users to assign a “phase”,
                                                      to an object and then use Revit’s view properties to view
                                                      different phases and create 4D snapshots. It is not pos-
                                                      sible to ’playback’ a model, however. Via the API, users
                                                      can link to scheduling applications and exchange data
                                                      with tools like MS Project to automate some 4D entry.
               Gehry          Digital Project         An add-on product, Construction Planning and Coordi-
               Technologies                           nation, allows users to link 3D components to Primav-
                                                      era or MS Project activities with their associated data
                                                      and generate 4D simulation analysis. Construction re-
                                                      lated objects need to be added (and removed when
                                                      appropriate) to DP model. Changes to Primavera or MS
                                                      Project schedule are propagated to linked DP model.
               Graphisoft     VICO Constructor        See VICO in table 6-2 below
                              Simulation Module
                              for ArchiCAD




c06.indd 229                                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:38:50 AM
          230 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

          FIGURE 6-13
          Diagram showing two
                                          2D paper                                                  CAD Software
                                          drawings
          different 4D modeling         from design/
                                                                           create 3D
                                        engineering
          processes.                                                      model per                manually turn on/off
                                            team
                                                                        schedule scope                  'layers',                create snapshot
          The manual process is                                                                                                                               4D snapshots/
                                                                            adding                   components for             representing date
                                                                                                                                                               animation
                                                                          temporary                 schedule date or              or time period
          typically done within an                                      components as                    period
          available CAD, BIM, or                                            needed
                                         construction
          visualization software.       schedule, plan
          Specialized 4D software
          eliminates some steps,                                                      Manual/CAD-based 4D process
          and provides direct links
          to the schedule and                                                                      4D tool/software
          building model thus
                                           3D/BIM
          making the process                                               group or reorganize
                                         models from
                                                                           model components
          faster and more reliable.      project team
                                                                                                                manually or auto-link
                                                                                                                   components or
                                                                                                                                                                 4D model
                                                                                                                component groups to
                                          construction                     assign activity types                construction activities
                                          schedule or                      for visual behaviors
                                             plan                               (construct,
                                                                            deconstruct, etc.)




                                            manual link, changes must                    4D Tool/BIM-based process                                  digital links, changes are
                                             be updated by scheduler                                                                                 updated automatically




          FIGURE 6-14
          Diagram showing the
          key data interfaces of
          a 4D model.
          A) 4D hierarchy or
          grouping of components
          related to activities in
          the schedule.
          B) Organization of
          CAD data provided by
          design and engineering
          organizations.
          C) Schedule data that
          can be illustrated hier-
          archically but is typically
          a set of activities with
          properties, such as start
          and finish dates.
          D) Activity types that
          define the visual
          behavior of the 4D
          model.




c06.indd 230                                                                                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:38:50 AM
                                                                                    6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning              231

               Table 6-2 4D Tools
               Company         Product                   Remarks

               Bentley         ProjectWise Navigator     This is a stand alone application that provides a series of services for:
                                                         Importing multiple 2D and 3D design files from many sources (DWG, DGN,
                                                         DWF, etc.)
                                                         Reviewing 2D drawings and 3D models concurrently
                                                         Following links between data files and components
                                                         Reviewing interferences (clashes), and Viewing and analyzing schedule simulations

               CommonPoint     Project 4D ConstructSim   Common Point 4D includes some specialized 4D features such as conflict analy-
                                                         ses, adding laydown objects, animation, and custom features to create 4D movies.
                                                         The 4D linking process includes drag-drop manual linking and automatic link-
                                                         ing. Users can distribute a 4D viewer to team members. Common Point 4D only
                                                         imports “vrml” geometry via exporters to popular BIM tools with limited object
                                                         meta-data.; and users can import from all the major schedule software products.
                                                         The higher-end ConstructSim supports more data-rich import of more formats
                                                         with high-end analyses, organization, and status visualization features.

               Innovaya        Visual Simulation         Links any 3D design data in DWG with either MS Project or Primavera scheduling
                                                         tasks and shows projects in 4D. Generates simulation of construction process.
                                                         Synchronizes changes made to either the schedule or to 3D objects. Uses color
                                                         codes to detect potential schedule problems such as objects assigned to two con-
                                                         current activities or not assigned to any activity.

               Navisworks      JetStream Timeliner       The Timeliner module includes all the features of JetStream’s visualization envi-
                                                         ronment and supports the largest number of BIM formats and best overall visu-
                                                         alization capabilities. The Timeliner supports automatic and manual linking to
                                                         imported schedule data from a variety of schedule applications. Manual linking is
                                                         tedious and not user-friendly and there are few custom 4D features.

               Synchro ltd.    Synchro 4D                This is a powerful new 4D tool with the most sophisticated scheduling capabili-
                                                         ties of any of the 4D software. The tool requires deeper knowledge of scheduling
                                                         and project management than the other tools to take advantage of its risk and
                                                         resource analysis features. The tool includes built-in tools to visualize risk, buffer-
                                                         ing, and resource utilization in addition to basic 4D visualization.

               VICO Software   Virtual Construction      Virtual Construction 5D construction planning system consisting of Constructor,
                                                         Estimating, Control and 5D Presenter. The building model is developed in Construc-
                                                         tor and objects are assigned recipes that define the tasks and resources needed to
                                                         build or fabricate them, quantities and costs are calculated in Estimator, schedule
                                                         activities are defined and planned using lie of balance techniques in Control and
                                                         then the 4D construction simulation is visualized in Presenter. As an alternative to
                                                         using Control, schedule dates can be imported from Primavera or MS Project.


                    Here are some things to consider when evaluating specialized 4D tools
               listed in Table 6-2:

                    • BIM Import capabilities: What geometry or BIM formats can users
                      import and what types of object data can the tool import, e.g., geom-
                      etry, names, unique identifiers, etc.? In some cases the tools only import




c06.indd 231                                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:38:51 AM
          232 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                        geometry, geometry names, and hierarchy. This may be sufficient for
                                        basic 4D modeling, but other data may be needed so users can view
                                        object properties or filter or query based on this data.
                                      • Schedule import capabilities: What schedule formats does the tool
                                        import and are the formats native files, text files? Some scheduling
                                        applications like Primavera work with a database. If so, the tool will
                                        need to support connections to the database and extraction of the sched-
                                        ule data.
                                      • Merge/Update for 3D/BIM building model: Can users merge multiple
                                        files into a single model and update portions or all of the model? If a
                                        project involves models created in multiple BIM tools, the 4D modeling
                                        process will require import and merging these models into one tool.
                                        Thus, the 4D tool must provide this capability.
                                      • Reorganization: Can you reorganize the data after it has been imported?
                                        (see discussion in following section). Tools that support easy reorganiza-
                                        tion of model components will greatly expedite the modeling process.
                                      • Temporary components: Can users add (and later remove) temporary
                                        components such as scaffolds, excavation areas, storage areas, cranes,
                                        etc. to the 4D model? In many cases, users have to create these com-
                                        ponents and import them with the model geometry. Ideally, the 4D tool
                                        would have a library to allow users to quickly add these components.
                                      • Animation: Can you simulate detailed crane simulations, or other instal-
                                        lation sequences? Some 4D tools allow users to “move” objects over a
                                        specified time period to allow visualization of equipment movement.
                                      • Analysis: Does the tool support specific analyses such as time-space
                                        conflict analysis, a feature found in Common Point, to identify activities
                                        happening in the same space.
                                      • Output: Can users easily output multiple snapshots for specified periods
                                        of time or create movies with pre-defined views and time periods? The cus-
                                        tom output features will facilitate sharing the model with project team.
                                      • Automatic linking: Can users automatically link building components
                                        to schedule items based on fields or rules. This is useful for projects with
                                        standard naming conventions.

                                  6.7.4 BIM-Supported Planning and Scheduling Issues
                                        and Guidelines
                                  While the mechanics of the planning and scheduling process may vary depend-
                                  ing on the planner’s tools, there are several issues that any planner or 4D
                                  modeling team should consider when preparing and developing a 4D model.




c06.indd 232                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:38:51 AM
                                                                                6.7 Construction Analysis and Planning   233

               Model Scope
               If the model is for marketing or a design competition, its life will be relatively
               short. The appropriate level of detail depends on what the client has requested.
               If the team intends to use the model for the duration of the project, then a plan
               should outline when to migrate from a 90-day or higher-level schedule contain-
               ing perhaps 100–300 activities to a detailed, 1-week to 3-week look-ahead
               schedule containing thousands of activities. Teams may start with constructing
               ‘shells’ of buildings and then replace these buildings with detailed interiors.

               Level of Detail
               The level of detail is affected by the size of the model, the time allotted for build-
               ing it, and what critical items need to be communicated. An architect may build
               a highly-detailed wall system to support a rendering for comparing materials. The
               contractor may also elect to represent this system using a single component,
               because the critical issues are sequencing of the floors or wall sections, not the
               wall system’s sequence of installation. In other cases, the sequencing of detailed
               components, such as a sophisticated structural earthquake system, may require a
               more detailed model for each installation step. The construction tasks required
               to build a given object may also require multiple activities, e.g. a foundation foot-
               ing object requires excavation, forming, placing rebar, placing concrete, curing
               concrete, and stripping forms.
                    Planners can use a single component to represent multiple activities. A
               single wall section can be used to show formwork, rebar concrete pour, con-
               crete finishing, and wall finishes. The team can apply multiple activities and
               activity types to a single component.

               Re-organization
               4D tools often allow the scheduler to re-organize or create custom groupings
               of components or geometric entities. This is an important feature because the
               way that the designer or engineer organizes a model is not usually sufficient for
               relating components to activities. For example, the designer may group systems
               of components for ease of duplicating when creating the model, such as a col-
               umn and a footing. The planner, however, will organize these components into
               zones of slabs or footings. Figure 6-14 shows a design hierarchy and a 4D
               hierarchy for two different organizations of a model. This ability tore-organize
               is critical for developing and supporting a flexible and accurate 4D model.

               Temporary components
               The building model should reflect the construction process so that even
               temporary structures, excavation details, and other features that exist during




c06.indd 233                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:38:52 AM
          234 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                       construction can be shown in the 4D simulation. Figure 6-15 shows a 4D
                                       model that contains scaffolding to help construction planners evaluate safety
                                       and constructability issues. The scaffolding is necessary because it will influ-
                                       ence spatial constraints for people and equipment.

                                       Decomposition and Aggregation
                                       Objects shown as a single entity, such as a slab, may need to be broken into por-
                                       tions to show how they will be constructed. Another issue that planners face is
                                       how to break up specific components, such as walls or roofs, that a designer or
                                       engineer would model as a single component but the planner would divide
                                       or break-up into zones. Most specialized tools do not provide this capability,
                                       and the planner must perform these ‘break-ups’ within the 3D/BIM tool.

                                       Schedule Properties
                                       Early start and completion dates are often used for 4D simulation. It may be
                                       desirable however, to explore other dates, such as a late start or finish or a leveled
                                       start or finish, to view the impact of alternative schedules on the visual simula-
                                       tion of the construction process. Additionally, other schedule properties are valu-
                                       able in the 4D modeling process that are often project-specific. For example, in
                                       one study a team associated specific activities with the number of hospital beds
                                       that were either taken out-of-service or made operational so that the team could
                                       visualize, at any time, the number of hospital beds available and ensure that a
                                       minimum number could remain in use. It is also possible to code each activity



          FIGURE 6-15
          A 4D model snapshot
          showing scaffolding.
          Adding temporary
          equipment is often
          critical for determining
          the feasibility of the
          schedule; the details
          allow subcontractors
          and planners to visu-
          ally assess safety and
          constructability issues.
          (See color insert for full
          color figure.) Image pro-
          vided courtesy of M.A.
          Mortenson, Inc.




c06.indd 234                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:38:52 AM
                                     6.8 Integration with Cost and Schedule Control and Other Management Functions   235

               with a property titled ‘Area,’ or ‘Responsibility’ so that the model can show who
               is responsible for certain activities and quickly identify trades working near each
               other to improve coordination.



                    6.8 INTEGRATION WITH COST AND SCHEDULE
                        CONTROL AND OTHER MANAGEMENT
                        FUNCTIONS

               During the construction process, organizations use a variety of tools and proc-
               esses to manage and report on the project’s status. These range from schedule
               and cost control systems to systems for accounting, procurement, payroll, safety,
               etc. Many of these systems report or rely on design and building-component
               information, yet they are not typically linked or associated with design drawings
               or BIM. This leads to redundant efforts of manually entering design information
               and identifying problems associated with the synchronization of various
               systems and processes. BIM software can provide vital support for these tasks,
               because it has detailed quantity and other component information that can be
               linked to other applications. Furthermore, contractors and project stakeholders
               can gain new insights by leveraging a graphic model to visually analyze project
               progress and highlight potential or existing problems. Some examples of how
               organizations are using 3D/BIM to support these tasks are:

                   • Project Status: Each component can have a field ‘status,’ and depend-
                     ing on the project, values may be ‘in design,’ ‘approved for construction
                     review,’ ‘in fabrication,’ etc. These fields can then be associated with
                     colors so that the team can quickly determine the status of the facility
                     and identify bottlenecks or areas that are behind schedule.
                   • Procurement Purchasing: Since BIM objects define what needs to be
                     purchased, it is possible to make purchases directly using the BIM tool.
                     At the time this book was written (early 2007), this capability was in a
                     very early stage of development. This capability will certainly improve,
                     as product manufacturers develop models of their products that can
                     be stored on Internet servers and found using search systems. A good
                     example of a BIM procurement application has been developed by
                     1st Pricing (1stPricing 2007). Using downloadable plug-ins, it allows
                     procurement within AutoCAD, ArchiCAD, Architectural Desktop,
                     TurboCAD, and soon Revit. This product provides real-time quotes on
                     doors and windows delivered to the job site based on zip code. Other
                     types of components are being added to the system.




c06.indd 235                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:38:53 AM
          236 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                      • Procurement tracking: Another important issue is the procurement
                                        status of services and material. Often, schedules consist of large numbers
                                        of construction activities, which makes it difficult to relate parallel design
                                        and procurement activities. By tracking the status of these activities,
                                        planners can perform queries to easily identify gaps in the procurement
                                        process as they relate to design and construction. By linking the schedule
                                        to a building information model, it is also possible to visualize where
                                        procurement delays are likely to impact the building. For example, if a
                                        long-lead item is scheduled to be installed in two months and the pro-
                                        curement process is not yet complete, the team can address the issue
                                        quickly to prevent further downstream delays. A visual link to a building
                                        model helps to better predict the impact that procurement delays will
                                        have on construction.
                                      • Safety management: Safety is a critical issue for all construction
                                        organizations. Any tool that supports safety training, education, and
                                        reveals unsafe conditions is valuable to the construction team. A visual
                                        model allows teams to assess conditions and identify unsafe areas that
                                        might otherwise go unrealized until the team is in the field. For example,
                                        on a theme park project, a team modeled envelopes for testing rides
                                        to ensure that no activities were taking place during the testing period
                                        within the test envelope. Using 4D simulation, they identified a conflict
                                        and resolved it ahead of time.


                                       6.9 USE FOR OFFSITE FABRICATION

                                  Offsite fabrication requires considerable planning and accurate design informa-
                                  tion. It is becoming more common for contractors to fabricate components
                                  offsite to reduce labor costs and risks associated with onsite installation. Today,
                                  many types of building components are produced and/or assembled offsite in
                                  factories and delivered to the site for installation. BIM provides the capability
                                  for contractors to input BIM component details directly, including 3D geometry,
                                  material specifications, finishing requirements, delivery sequence, and timing,
                                  etc. before and during the fabrication process. In this section, the benefits from
                                  the perspective of the contractor are discussed. The benefits from the perspec-
                                  tive of the fabricator are explained in more detail in Chapter 7.
                                       Coordination of subcontractors’ activities and designs constitutes a large
                                  part of a contractor’s added-value to a project. Contractors able to exchange
                                  accurate BIM information with fabricators can save time by verifying and




c06.indd 236                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:38:53 AM
                                6.10 Use of BIM Onsite: Verification, Guidance, and Tracking of Construction Activities   237

               validating the model. This reduces errors and allows fabricators to participate
               earlier in the pre-planning and construction process.
                    There are excellent examples of close coordination and exchange of models
               between contractors and fabricators in the steel and sheet metal industries. As
               discussed in Chapter 7, many steel fabricators leverage 3D technologies to
               manage and automate the steel fabrication process. The adoption of product
               model exchange formats, such as the CIS/2 format (explained in detail in
               Chapter 3) (CIS/2 2007), greatly facilitates the exchange of information
               between design and engineering, contractors, and fabricators. These conditions
               allow project teams to coordinate and optimize the sequence of steel or sheet
               metal. In Chapter 9, the benefits of a close digital relationship between a con-
               tractor and a fabricator are captured in several case studies.
                    The structural steel industry is well-positioned to leverage BIM due to the
               efforts of the AISC (AISC 2007) and the development of the CIS/2 (CIS/2 2007)
               format. Other standards are being developed for precast concrete but are not yet
               in commercial use. The National BIM Standards effort (NIBS 2007) considers
               how to use building information models to provide information for fabrication.
               The NBIMS is reviewed in Chapter 3. Further details, including BIM technology
               requirements and available software products, are discussed in Chapter 7.


                  6.10 USE OF BIM ONSITE: VERIFICATION,
                       GUIDANCE, AND TRACKING OF
                       CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES

               Contractors must field-verify the installation of building components to ensure
               that dimensional and performance specifications are met. When errors are found,
               the contractor must spend further time rectifying them. The building model can
               be used to verify that actual construction circumstances match those shown in the
               model. Note that even when a project team creates an accurate model, human
               error during installation remains a possibility, and catching these errors as they
               occur or as soon as possible has great value. An example of this occurred on the
               Letterman Digital Arts Center (LDAC) in San Francisco, where the project team
               built a complete model after the project had been designed and subsequently
               documented a field error in a report (Boryslawski 2006) as described in the fol-
               lowing excerpt:

                   “During one of the daily rounds of onsite photography, we recognized a criti-
                   cal error shown in the positioning of concrete formwork, which was quickly
                   confirmed by referencing the BIM. This error occurred when the formwork




c06.indd 237                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:38:53 AM
          238 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                      layout person measured from a column that was off the standard grid to
                                      the edge of the concrete slab. Pouring more concrete in this complex post-
                                      tension slab construction would have had serious consequences not only
                                      for the contractor but also for the entire project, as there were three more
                                      floors to be built above this floor. The problem was solved just as the con-
                                      crete was being poured, saving what would have most definitely been a
                                      major expense.”


                                      In this situation, the intimate knowledge gained by virtually building the
                                  project allowed the team to discover these field errors. The team combined tradi-
                                  tional field-verification processes of daily site walks with model reviews to detect
                                  potential field errors.
                                      More sophisticated techniques are evolving to support field verification,
                                  guide layout, and track installation. Some examples of these are:

                                      • Laser scanning technologies: Contractors can use laser technologies,
                                        such as laser measurement devices that report data directly to a BIM tool,
                                        to verify that concrete pours are situated in exactly the correct location
                                        or that columns are properly located. Laser scanning can also be used
                                        effectively for rehabilitation work and capturing as-built construction
                                        details. Demonstrations are being undertaken now (2007) by the GSA
                                        to assess this use (GSA 2007).
                                      • Machine-guidance technologies: Earthwork contractors can use machine-
                                        guided equipment to guide and verify grading and excavation activities
                                        driven by dimensions extracted from a 3D/BIM model.
                                      • GPS technologies: Rapid advances in GPS and the availability of
                                        mobile GPS devices offer contractors the ability to link the building
                                        model to global-positioning-systems to verify locations. Systems devel-
                                        oped at Carnegie-Mellon University and used by transportation depart-
                                        ments to facilitate delivery of information to field workers on road or
                                        bridge construction are managed through the coordination of GPS and
                                        2D/3D/BIM, enabling field crews to quickly find related information
                                        based on their location.
                                      • RFID tags: Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags can support
                                        the tracking of component delivery and installation onsite. BIM com-
                                        ponents that include references to RFID tags can automatically update
                                        with links to field scanning devices and provide contractors with rapid
                                        feedback on field progress and installation.

                                     The use of BIM in the field will increase dramatically as mobile devices and
                                  methods to deliver BIM information to field workers becomes commonplace.




c06.indd 238                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:38:54 AM
                                                            6.11 Implications for Contract and Organizational Changes   239

                  6.11 IMPLICATIONS FOR CONTRACT AND
                       ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGES

               The above descriptions of BIM-supported work processes for contractors
               emphasize the advantages of early and continual collaboration of the project
               team so that key project participants are involved in the development of the
               virtual model. Contractors of all types that integrate their practice around BIM,
               as opposed to traditional 2D CAD, will reap the greatest advantages. Projects
               that involve designers as well as general and major subcontractors, by incorpo-
               rating constructability, cost, and construction planning knowledge earlier in
               the process, will experience project-wide benefits for all team members. The
               advantages that an integrated, collaborative, BIM-supported approach can
               bring will make it a favored and widely used method in the future.
                    This organizational approach will, of course, require new contracts that
               encourage close collaboration and sharing of information, as well as a sharing
               of the technology’s associated benefits. A new approach to sharing risks and
               setting fees may also be required, because the increased emphasis on early
               collaboration means that efforts by team members and the benefits they pro-
               duce may change. Advanced owners are already experimenting with new ideas
               for exploring how to better incorporate contractor involvement through a BIM-
               driven process. Some of these are discussed in the case studies in Chapter 9.
                    The Associated General Contractors (AGC) is closely following the impli-
               cations of BIM for their members. In October, 2006, the AGC published a
               48-page document titled, “The Contractor’s Guide to BIM,” (AGC 2006) which
               is available at their web site (free for their members, at a cost for others). The
               report is based on first-hand experience provided by contractors that have
               already used BIM. The guide discusses the implementation of BIM using
               2D drawings produced by the design team and contrasts this with the faster and
               more accurate process of starting with a 3D/building model generated by the
               design team. The guide suggests that an experienced digital modeler can create
               a building model from 2D drawings in one-to-two weeks at a cost of 0.1% to
               0.5% of the total construction costs. Contractors must balance these costs with
               the many potential benefits of BIM, as discussed earlier in this chapter.
                    With respect to changes in management responsibilities, “The Contractor’s
               Guide to BIM” (AGC 2006) says:

                   “Whether the design is issued in the form of 2D printed documents or a 3D
                   electronic media or in a combination of both, the responsibilities of the mem-
                   bers of the project team remain unchanged. The important issue is to ensure
                   that project team members thoroughly understand the nature and exactitude
                   of the information that is being conveyed.”




c06.indd 239                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:38:54 AM
          240 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry

                                  It adds:

                                      “Contractors and Construction Managers need to recognize that coordination
                                      whether with BIM technology or a light table is a core service not an added
                                      service. BIM tools that can facilitate a great deal of coordination are now avail-
                                      able and when applied appropriately they can reduce the cost and time of con-
                                      struction. The question is not whether BIM will be used on a project, but to
                                      what extent it will be used. It is known that BIM coordination improves com-
                                      munication, which decreases construction cost and time, thus reducing risk.
                                      Contractors and Construction Managers have a responsibility to evaluate the
                                      costs of various implementation processes and provide the results of this evalu-
                                      ation to Owners and design teams in quantifiable terms.
                                           As the leaders of construction coordination, Contractors and Construction
                                      Managers have a responsibility to encourage and facilitate the sharing and dis-
                                      tribution of BIM technology on a project. They must also understand and con-
                                      vey the nature of the information that is being shared. Appropriate contract
                                      language that will foster the open sharing of BIM information must be
                                      developed. The contract language can not alter the relationships of the project
                                      team members or change their responsibilities beyond their ability to perform.
                                      As an example, if a designer approves an electronic file prepared by a detailer,
                                      and this file contains a dimensional inaccuracy, the designer must be protected
                                      to the same extent that they would had the approval document been a printed
                                      drawing.”

                                       Finally, while the guide does not recommend specific contract changes for
                                  accommodating BIM, it suggests that all parties agree to rely on the model (as
                                  opposed to 2D drawings in cases where the two representations do not agree);
                                  it suggests that all members of the team be given access to and take responsi-
                                  bility for their part of the model; and it recommends that an audit trail be
                                  maintained that tracks all changes made to the model. Clearly, this is an area
                                  that is rapidly evolving with the use of BIM tools.



                                     6.12 BIM IMPLEMENTATION

                                  Contractors working in close collaboration with project teams during the design
                                  phase will encounter fewer barriers to BIM adoption compared to contractors
                                  working in a design-bid-build environment. In the latter case, the collaboration
                                  process does not start until the job has been awarded to the low bid contractor;
                                  in the former, the contractor is involved with design decisions and can contribute
                                  construction knowledge to the design. The same applies to the subcontractors
                                  that participate in the project.




c06.indd 240                                                                                                               1/16/08 11:38:54 AM
                                                                                           6.12 BIM Implementation   241

                    In both cases, the contractor needs to understand how the use of 3D/BIM,
               rather than 2D drawings, can be used to support coordination, estimating, sched-
               uling, and project management. A good implementation plan involves making
               sure that management and other key staff members acquire a thorough under-
               standing of how BIM supports specific work processes. This should be done at a
               company-wide level, although any particular project could be used as a starting
               point. If the architects and other designers on the company’s projects are not all
               using BIM technology, it will be necessary for the contractor to build models that
               are appropriate for the above functions. This will expose them to a deeper under-
               standing of model building and the required standards—for colors, objects,
               construction knowledge, etc.—that need to be incorporated into the model.
               Training can be obtained from BIM software firms or from specialized consult-
               ants. The cost of building the model, estimated at about 0.1% of construction
               cost (see the Camino Group Medical Building case study in Chapter 9 for discus-
               sion of model building cost), will be more than offset by the eventual savings in
               errors, shortened project durations, better use of prefabrication options, fewer
               workers in the field, and improved collaboration among the team. This topic is
               discussed in greater detail for subcontractors and fabricators in Chapter 7.




                 Chapter 6 Discussion Questions

                              1. There is tremendous variation in the size and type of
                                 construction companies. In 2004, what percent of firms
                                 were composed of 1 to 9 people? In what sector were a
                                 majority of these firms?
                              2. What are the main advantages of design-build over
                                 design-bid-build contracts? Why does the use of BIM favor
                                 the design-build contract? For public projects, why
                                 are design-bid-build contracts often preferred (see also
                                 Chapter 1, Section 1.1.2)?
                              3. From the contractor’s point-of-view, what kinds of informa-
                                 tion should a building model contain? If the architect uses
                                 BIM to design a building, what information needed by the
                                 contractor is NOT likely to be present?
                                                                                   (Continued)




c06.indd 241                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:38:55 AM
          242 Chapter 6 BIM for the Construction Industry


                                                4. What approaches are available to develop a building
                                                   model that can be used by the contractor? What are the
                                                   limitations and benefits of each approach?
                                                5. What level-of-detail is needed in a building model for
                                                   useful clash detection? What are the reasons for detecting
                                                   soft as opposed to hard clashes? What role do subcon-
                                                   tractors play in the clash detection process?
                                                6. What are the main advantages and limitations of using
                                                   BIM for preparing a cost estimate? How can an estimator
                                                   link the building model to an estimating system?
                                                7. What are the basic requirements for performing a
                                                   4D analysis of a construction schedule? What are the
                                                   contractor’s options for obtaining the information needed
                                                   to carry out this analysis? What major benefits can be
                                                   obtained from this analysis?
                                                8. How can BIM be linked to cost and schedule control
                                                   systems? What advantages does this provide?
                                                9. What are the main advantages of using BIM for procure-
                                                   ment? Why is it still difficult to do this?
                                               10. What are the requirements for using a building model for
                                                   off-site fabrication? What types of exchange standards
                                                   are needed for fabrication of steel members?
                                               11. What types of organizational and contractual changes
                                                   are needed for effective BIM use?




c06.indd 242                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:38:55 AM
               CHAPTER                       7
               BIM for Subcontractors
               and Fabricators



                      7.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

               Buildings have become increasingly complex. They are one-of-a-kind products
               requiring multi-disciplinary design and fabrication skills. Specialization of the
               construction trades and economies of prefabrication contribute to increasingly
               larger proportions of buildings’ components and systems being pre-assembled
               or fabricated off-site. Unlike the mass production of off-the-shelf parts,
               however, complex buildings require customized design and fabrication of
               ‘engineered-to-order’ (ETO) components, including: structural steel, precast
               concrete structures and architectural facades, curtain walls of various types,
               mechanical, electrical and plumbing (MEP) systems, timber roof trusses, and
               reinforced concrete tilt-up panels.
                    By their nature, ETO components demand sophisticated engineering and
               careful collaboration between designers to ensure that pieces fit within the
               building properly without interfering with other building systems. Design and
               coordination with 2D CAD systems is error-prone, labor intensive and relies
               on long cycle-times. BIM addresses these problems in that it allows for the ‘vir-
               tual construction’ of components and coordination among all building systems
               prior to producing each piece. The benefits of BIM for subcontractors and fab-
               ricators include: enhanced marketing and rendering through visual images and
               automated estimating; reduced cycle-times for detailed design and production;
               elimination of almost all design coordination errors; lower engineering and

               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   243



c07.indd 243                                                                                                                       12/19/07 2:05:12 PM
          244 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 detailing costs; data to drive automated manufacturing technologies; and
                                 improved pre-assembly and prefabrication.
                                      Accurate, reliable, and ubiquitous information is critical to the flow of
                                 products in any supply chain. For this reason, BIM systems can enable leaner
                                 construction methods if harnessed across an organization’s many departments
                                 or through the entire supply chain. The extent and depth of these process changes
                                 depends on the extent to which building information model databases are inte-
                                 grated within and between organizations.
                                      To be useful for fabrication detailing, BIM tools need at least to support
                                 parametric and customizable parts and relationships, provide interfaces to
                                 management information systems, and be able to import building model infor-
                                 mation from building designers’ BIM tools. Ideally, they should also offer good
                                 information model visualizations and export data in forms suitable for automa-
                                 tion of fabrication tasks using computer-controlled machinery.
                                      Within the chapter, the major classes of fabricators and their specific needs
                                 are discussed. For each fabricator type, appropriate BIM software tools are
                                 listed and the leading tools are surveyed. Finally, the chapter provides guidance
                                 for companies planning adoption of BIM. To successfully introduce BIM into a
                                 fabrication plant with its own in-house engineering staff, or into an engineer-
                                 ing detailing service provider, adoption must begin with setting clear, achieva-
                                 ble goals with measurable milestones. Human resource considerations are the
                                 leading concern; not only because the costs of training and setup of software to
                                 suit local practices far exceed the costs of hardware and software, but also
                                 because the success of any BIM adoption will depend on the skill and good will
                                 of the people tasked with using the technology.



                                      7.1 INTRODUCTION

                                 The professional gap between designers and builders that opened during the
                                 European Renaissance has continued to widen over the centuries, while build-
                                 ing systems have grown increasingly complex and technologically advanced.
                                 Technical drawings and specifications on paper were the essential medium for
                                 communicating designer intent to builders, thereby bridging the gap.
                                      Over time, builders became more and more specialized and began to
                                 produce building parts offsite, first in craft shops and later in industrial facili-
                                 ties, for subsequent assembly onsite. As a result, designers no longer wielded
                                 control over the entire design; expert knowledge for any given system lay
                                 within the realm of specialized fabricators. Builders and fabricators are now
                                 required to prepare their own drawing sets, called shop drawings, for two




c07.indd 244                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:05:13 PM
                                                                                                    7.1 Introduction   245

               purposes: to develop and detail the designs for production and, no less
               importantly, to communicate their construction intent back to the designers for
               approval.
                    In fact, the two-way cycle of communication is not simply a review but an
               integral part of designing a building. Even more so, this has become the case
               where multiple systems are fabricated and their design must be integrated con-
               sistently. Drawings are used to coordinate the location and function of various
               building system parts. This is the case today for all but the simplest buildings.
                    In traditional practice, paper drawings and specifications prepared by fab-
               ricators for designers fulfill additional vital purposes. They are a key part of
               commercial contracts for the procurement of fabricators’ products. They are
               used directly for installation and construction, and they are also the primary
               means for storing information generated through the design and construction
               process.
                    For subcontractors and fabricators, BIM supports the whole collaborative
               process of design development, detailing, and integration. In many recorded
               cases, BIM has been leveraged to enable greater degrees of prefabrication than
               were possible without it, by shortening lead times and deepening design inte-
               gration. As noted in Chapter 2, object-based parametric design tools had
               already been developed and used to support many construction activities, such
               as structural steel fabrication, before the earliest comprehensive BIM tools
               became available.
                    Beyond these short term impacts on productivity and quality, BIM enables
               fundamental process changes, because it provides the power to manage the
               intense amount of information required of ‘mass customization,’ which is a key
               precept of lean production (Womack and Jones 2003).
                    As the use of lean construction methods (Howell 1999) becomes wide-
               spread, subcontractors and fabricators will increasingly find that market forces
               will compel them to provide customized prefabricated building components at
               price levels previously appropriate for mass-produced components.
                    After defining the context for our discussion (Section 7.2), this chapter
               describes the potential benefits of BIM for improving various facets of the fab-
               rication process, from the perspective of the subcontractor or fabricator
               responsible for making and installing building parts (Section 7.3) to the funda-
               mental process changes to be expected (Section 7.4). BIM system requirements
               for effective use by fabricators are listed and explained for modeling and detail-
               ing in general (Section 7.5). Detailed information is provided for a number of
               specific trades (Section 7.6). Significant software packages for fabricators are
               listed, and pertinent issues concerning the adoption and use of BIM are dis-
               cussed (Section 7.7).




c07.indd 245                                                                                                           12/19/07 2:05:13 PM
          246 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                       7.2 TYPES OF SUBCONTRACTORS AND
                                           FABRICATORS

                                 Subcontractors and fabricators perform a very wide range of specialized tasks
                                 in construction. Most are identified by the type of work they do, or the type of
                                 components they fabricate. For a discussion of the ways in which they can
                                 exploit BIM, the degree of engineering design required in their work is a useful
                                 way of classifying them. Looking beyond bulk raw materials, building compo-
                                 nents can be classified as belonging to one of three types:

                                     1. Made-to-stock components, such as standard plumbing fixtures, drywall
                                        panels and studs, pipe sections, etc.
                                     2. Made-to-order components, such as pre-stressed hollow-core planks*,
                                        and windows and doors selected from catalogs.
                                     3. Engineered-to-order components, such as the members of structural steel
                                        frames, structural pre-cast concrete pieces, facade panels of various types,
                                        custom kitchens and other cabinet-ware, and any other component cus-
                                        tomized to fit a specific location and fulfill certain building functions.

                                      The first two classifications are designed for general use and not customized
                                 for specific applications†. These components are specified from catalogs. Most
                                 BIM systems enable suppliers to provide electronic catalogs of their products,
                                 allowing designers to embed representative objects and direct links to them in
                                 building information models. The suppliers of these components are rarely
                                 involved in their installation or assembly onsite. As a result, they are rarely involved
                                 directly in the design and construction process. For this reason, this chapter
                                 focuses on the needs of designers, coordinators, fabricators, and installers of
                                 building components of the third type: engineered-to-order (ETO) components.

                                 7.2.1 Engineered-To- Order (ETO) Component Producers
                                 ETO producers typically operate production facilities that manufacture compo-
                                 nents that need to be designed and engineered prior to actual production. In most
                                 cases, they are subcontracted to a building’s general contractor or, in the case of a
                                 project being executed by a construction management service company, they are
                                 subcontracted to the owner. The subcontract typically encompasses detailed
                                 design, engineering, fabrication, and erection of their products.

                                 *
                                  Hollow-core planks are pre-engineered but can be custom-cut to arbitrary lengths.
                                 †
                                  They are distinguished in that the second type is only produced as needed, usually for
                                 commercial or technological reasons, such as high inventory costs or short shelf-life.




c07.indd 246                                                                                                               12/19/07 2:05:13 PM
                                                                                   7.2 Types of Subcontractors and Fabricators   247

               Table 7-1 Engineered-to-order building components and their annual market
               volume in the U.S.
                   Engineered-to-order component fabricator/            Value of shipments or services
                   designer/coordinator                                         in 2002 ($1M)

                   Structural steel buildings                                      $ 3,079
                                                          Fabricators               $2,897
                                                            Detailers                 $182

                   Precast concrete                                                $ 4,131
                                                  Structural products               $3,180
                                                Architectural facades                 $951

                   Curtain walls                                                    $1,707*

                   Timber trusses (floor and roof trusses)                          $4,487

                   Reinforcing bars for concrete                                    $1,934
               *
                Estimate based on new construction for office and commercial buildings.
               Source: 2002 Economic Census, U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce. (U.S. 2004).


                    Although some companies maintain large in-house engineering departments,
               their core business is fabrication. Others outsource part or all of their engineering
               work to independent consultants (dedicated design service providers – see below).
               They may also subcontract erection or installation of their product onsite to inde-
               pendent companies.
                    Some examples of ETO producers are provided in Table 7-1 along with
               estimations of their respective market volume in the U.S. In addition, there are
               building construction trades that do not function exclusively as ETO producers
               but offer significant ETO component content as part of their systems.
               Examples are: plumbing, heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC),
               elevators and escalators, and finish carpentry.


               7.2.2 Design Service Providers
               Design service providers offer engineering services to producers of engineered-to-
               order components. They perform work on a fee basis and generally do not partici-
               pate in actual fabrication and onsite installation of the components they design.
               Service firms include: structural steel detailers, precast concrete design and detail-
               ing engineers, and specialized facade and curtain-wall consultants, among others.
                    Designers of tilt-up concrete construction panels are a good example of
               such providers. Their expertise in engineering, designing, and preparing shop-
               drawings enables general contractors or specialized production crews to make
               large reinforced concrete wall panels in horizontal beds onsite and then lift




c07.indd 247                                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:14 PM
          248 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 (or tilt) them into place. This onsite fabrication method can be implemented by
                                 relatively small contracting companies, by virtue of the availability of these
                                 design service providers.

                                 7.2.3 Specialist Coordinators
                                 Specialist coordinators provide a comprehensive ETO product provision service
                                 by bringing together designers, material suppliers, and fabricators under a ‘virtual’
                                 subcontracting company. The rationale behind their work is that they offer flexibil-
                                 ity in the kinds of technical solutions they provide, because they do not have their
                                 own fixed production lines. This type of service is common in the provision of cur-
                                 tain walls and other architectural facades.
                                      The 100 11th Avenue, New York, case study (see Chapter 9) is a good
                                 example of this kind of arrangement. The designers of the facade system assem-
                                 bled an ad hoc ‘virtual’ subcontractor composed of a material supplier, a fabri-
                                 cator, an installer and a construction management firm.



                                      7.3 THE BENEFITS OF A BIM PROCESS
                                          FOR SUBCONTRACTOR FABRICATORS

                                 Figure 7-1 shows the typical information and product flow for ETO compo-
                                 nents in building construction. The process has three major parts: project acqui-
                                 sition (preliminary design and tendering), detailed design (engineering and
                                 coordination), and fabrication (including delivery and installation). The process
                                 includes cycles that allow the design proposal to be formulated and revised,
                                 repeatedly if necessary. This typically occurs at the detailed design stage, where
                                 the fabricator is required to obtain feedback and approval from the building’s
                                 designers, subject not only to their own requirements but also to the coordina-
                                 tion of the fabricator’s design with other building systems also in development.
                                      There are a number of problems with the existing process. It is labor inten-
                                 sive, with much of the effort spent producing and updating documents. Sets of
                                 drawings and other documents have high rates of inaccuracies and inconsisten-
                                 cies, which are often not discovered until erection of the products onsite.
                                 The same information is entered into computer programs multiple times, each
                                 time for a distinct and separate use. The workflow has so many intermediate
                                 points for review that rework is common and cycle-times are long.
                                      Leveraging BIM can improve the process in several ways. First, BIM can
                                 improve the efficiency of most existing steps in the 2D CAD process by increasing
                                 productivity and eliminating the need to manually maintain consistency across
                                 multiple drawing files. With deeper implementation, however, BIM changes the
                                 process itself by enabling degrees of prefabrication that remain prohibitive in




c07.indd 248                                                                                                       12/19/07 2:05:14 PM
                                                              7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators      249

                                                                                                                   FIGURE 7-1
                                  Building design           Preliminary design                                     Typical information
                                                                                                                   and product flow for
                                                                                                                   a fabricator of ETO
                                                                                                                   components.
                                                              Estimate and
                                                                  tender                          Project
                                                                                                 Acquisition

                                                           Prepare and submit           Engineering design
                                     Contract
                                                             shop drawings                 and analysis


                               Engineer review of
                                 shop drawings


                                                               Revise shop
                                                                drawings
                                  Coordinate with                                                    Detailed
                                   other systems                                                     Design



                                   Other building             Purchase and                  Fabricate
                                  systems designs           process materials              components


                                                            Store and deliver
                                                              components



                                Operate and
                                                           Install components              Errors?
                               maintain building

                                                                                                 Fabrication

                                                          Legend
                                                                                      Information and
                 ETO fabricator                               Information flow          material flow
                                         Other activity
                    activity



               coordination costs with existing information systems. When implemented in the
               context of lean construction techniques, such as with pull flow‡ control of detail-
               ing, production, and installation, BIM can substantially reduce lead times and
               make the construction process more flexible and less wasteful.

               ‡
                Pull flow is a method for regulating the flow of work in a production system whereby
               production at any station is signaled to begin only when an ‘order’ for a part is received from
               the next station downstream. This is in contrast to traditional methods where production is
               ‘pushed’ by command from a central authority. In this context, pull flow implies that detailing
               and fabrication of components for any particular building section would begin only a short preset
               time before installation became possible for that section.




c07.indd 249                                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:05:15 PM
          250 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                     In Section 7.3, the short-term benefits are first explained in an approximated
                                 chronological sequence with reference to the process map shown in Figure 7-1.
                                 Section 7.4 discusses the more fundamental process change.

                                 7.3.1 Marketing and Tendering
                                 Preliminary design and estimating are essential activities for obtaining work
                                 for most subcontractor fabricators. To win a project with a profitable price
                                 requires precision in measuring quantities, attention to detail, and the ability
                                 to develop a competitive technical solution – all of which demand significant
                                 time investments by the company’s most knowledgeable engineers. Generally,
                                 not all tenders are successful, and companies are required to estimate more
                                 projects than are eventually performed, making the cost of tendering a sizable
                                 part of the company’s overhead.
                                      BIM technology aids engineers in all three of these areas: developing mul-
                                 tiple alternatives, detailing solutions to a reasonable degree, and measuring
                                 quantities.
                                      For marketing purposes, the persuasive power of a building information
                                 model for a potential client is not limited to its ability to provide a 3D or pho-
                                 torealistic image of a proposed building design, as is the case for software that
                                 is limited to 3D geometric modeling. Its power lies in its ability to adapt and
                                 change designs parametrically and better exploit the embedded engineering
                                 knowledge, allowing for more rapid design development for satisfying clients’
                                 needs to the greatest extent possible. The following excerpt from the Penn
                                 National case study describes the story of a precast concrete estimator’s experi-
                                 ence using a BIM tool to develop and sell a design for a parking garage:

                                     “To give you some background on this project, we started it as a design-build
                                     project for one of the salesmen. Bill modeled the entire garage (240´ wide ⫻
                                     585´ long ⫻ 5 supported levels), without connections or reinforcing, in
                                     8½ hours. It is composed of 1,250 pieces. We sent PDF images to the owner,
                                     architect, and engineer.

                                     The next morning we had a conference call with the client and received a
                                     number of modifications. Bill modified the model by 1:30 PM. I printed out the
                                     plan, elevations, and generated a Web viewer model. I sent these to the client
                                     at 1:50 PM via email. We then had another conference call at 2:00 pm. Two
                                     days later, we had the project. The owner was ecstatic about seeing a model of
                                     his garage. Oddly enough, it’s supposed to be 30 miles from our competitor’s
                                     plant. In fact, their construction arm is who we will be contracted to.

                                     We figured it would have taken 2 weeks in 2D to get to where we were in 3D.
                                     When we had the turnover meeting (a meeting we have to turnover scope
                                     from estimating to engineering, drafting and production) we projected the




c07.indd 250                                                                                                          12/19/07 2:05:15 PM
                                                         7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators   251

                   model on a screen to go over the scope of work. It went just as we envisioned.
                   It was exciting to see it actually happen that way.”

                   This example underscores how shortened response times – obtained
               through the use of BIM – enabled the company to better address the client’s
               decision making process.
                   The project referenced in this excerpt – the Penn National Parking Structure –
               is documented in further detail in the case studies in Chapter 9. Alternative
               structural layout configurations were considered. For each, the producer auto-
               matically extracted a quantity takeoff that listed the precast pieces required.
               These quantities enabled the provision of cost estimates for each, allowing the
               owner and general contractor to reach an informed decision concerning which
               configuration to adopt.


               7.3.2 Reduced Production Cycle-Times
               The use of BIM significantly reduces the time required to generate shop drawings
               and material takeoffs for procurement. This can be leveraged in three ways:

                   • To offer a superior level of service to building owners, for whom late
                     changes are often essential, by accommodating changes later in the proc-
                     ess than is possible in standard 2D CAD practice. Making changes to
                     building designs that impact fabricated pieces close to the time of fabri-
                     cation is very difficult in standard practice. Each change must propagate
                     through all of the assembly and shop drawings that may be affected and
                     must also coordinate with drawings that reflect adjacent or connected
                     components to the piece that changed. Where the change affects multi-
                     ple building systems provided by different fabricators or subcontractors,
                     coordination becomes far more complex and time-consuming. With BIM
                     tools, the changes are entered into the model and updated erection and
                     shop drawings are produced automatically. The benefit is enormous in
                     terms of time and effort required to properly implement the change.
                   • To enable a “pull production system” where the preparation of shop
                     drawings is driven by the production sequence. Short lead-times reduce
                     the system’s ‘inventory’ of design information, making it less vulnerable
                     to changes in the first place. Shop drawings are produced once a major-
                     ity of changes have already been made. This minimizes the likelihood
                     that additional changes will be needed. In this ‘lean’ system, shop draw-
                     ings are produced at the last responsible moment.
                   • To make prefabricated solutions viable in projects with restricted
                     lead-times between the contract date and the date demanded for the




c07.indd 251                                                                                                               12/19/07 2:05:15 PM
          252 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                       commencement of onsite construction, which would ordinarily prohibit
                                       their use. Often, general contractors find themselves committing to con-
                                       struction start dates with lead-times that are shorter than the time required
                                       to convert conventional building systems to prefabricated ones, due to the
                                       long lead-times needed for production design using 2D CAD. For exam-
                                       ple, a building designed with a cast-in-place concrete structure requires,
                                       on average, two to three months to complete the conversion to precast
                                       concrete and produce the first pieces needed. In contrast, BIM systems
                                       shorten the duration of design to a point where more components with
                                       longer lead-times can be prefabricated.

                                      These benefits derive from the high degree of automation that BIM systems
                                 are capable of achieving, when attempting to generate and communicate detailed
                                 fabrication and erection information. Parametric relationships between building
                                 model objects (that implement basic design knowledge) and their data attributes
                                 (that enable systems to compute and report meaningful information for production
                                 processes) are the two features of BIM systems that make these improvements
                                 possible. This technology is reviewed in further detail in Chapter 2.
                                      A reduction in cycle time can be achieved by exploiting automation for the
                                 production of shop drawings. The extent of this benefit has been explored in
                                 numerous research projects. In the structural steel fabrication industry, fabrica-
                                 tors reported almost a 50% savings in time for the engineering detailing stage
                                 (Crowley 2003). The General Motors Production Plant case study (Chapter 9)
                                 documents a project with a 50% reduction of overall design-construction time
                                 compared to traditional design-bid-build projects (although some of this reduc-
                                 tion can be attributed to other technologies that were used in addition to 3D
                                 models of the structural steel).
                                      An early but detailed evaluation of lead-time reduction in the case of archi-
                                 tectural precast concrete facade panels was performed within the framework of
                                 a research project initiated by a consortium of precast concrete companies
                                 (Sacks 2004). The first Gantt chart in Figure 7-2 shows a baseline process for
                                 engineering the design of an office building’s facade panels. The benchmark
                                 represents the shortest theoretical duration of the project using 2D CAD, if
                                 work had been performed continuously and without interruption. The bench-
                                 mark was obtained by reducing the durations measured for each activity in the
                                 actual project to the net number of hours that the project team worked on them.
                                 The second Gantt chart shows an estimated timeline for the same project, if
                                 performed using an available 3D parametric modeling system. In this case, the
                                 reduction in lead-time decreased from the baseline minimum of 80 working
                                 days to 34 working days.




c07.indd 252                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:16 PM
                                                               7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators   253

                                                                                                                FIGURE 7-2
                                                                                                                a) A benchmark of
                                                                                                                production lead-
                                                                                                                time for engineering
                                                                                                                design and detailing
                                                                                                                of architectural
                                                                                                                precast facade panels
                                                                                                                using 2D CAD; and
                                                                                                                b) an evaluation of a
                                                                                                                comparable lead-time
                                                                                                                using 3D parametric
                                                                                                                modeling (Sacks 2004).
                                                                                                                Reproduced from the
                                                                                                                Journal of Computing
                                                                                                                in Civil Engineering
                                                                                                                18(4), by permission of
                                                                                                                the American Society
                                                                                                                of Civil Engineers.




               7.3.3 Reduced Design Coordination Errors
               In the introduction to this chapter, we mentioned the need for fabricators to
               communicate construction intent to designers. One of the reasons for this
               is that the information obtained through the submittal and approval process is
               essential to the design team as a whole. It allows the team to identify potential
               conflicts inherent in the design. A physical clash between two components,
               where they are destined to occupy the same physical space, is the most obvious
               problem. It is termed a hard clash. Soft clashes occur when components are
               placed too close to one another, albeit not in physical contact, such as rebars
               that are too close to allow for the proper placing of concrete or pipes that
               require adequate space for insulation. Constructability problems are a third
               type, where certain components obstruct the construction or erection of other
               components by restricting or preventing access§.

               §
                The latter two – soft clashes and constructability clashes – are sometimes referred to as
               clearance clashes.




c07.indd 253                                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:16 PM
          254 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                      When design coordination is incomplete – in any given situation – the con-
                                 flicts are discovered during installation of the second component. Regardless
                                 of who carries the legal and fiscal liability for the resulting rework and delays,
                                 the fabricators inevitably suffer. Construction is leaner when work is predicta-
                                 ble and uninterrupted.
                                      BIM offers numerous technical benefits that improve design coordination at
                                 all stages. Of particular interest to fabricators is the ability to create integrated
                                 models of potentially conflicting systems at production-detail levels. A common
                                 tool for conflict detection is Navisworks Jetstream software (Navisworks 2007),
                                 which imports models from various formats into a single environment for iden-
                                 tifying physical clashes. The clashes are identified automatically and reported to
                                 the users (this application is discussed in Chapter 6, Section 5, and is apparent
                                 in the Camino Medical Group Building in Case Study 9.3).
                                      Current technology limitations prevent the resolution of clashes directly
                                 using this system. Technically, it is not possible to make corrections in the
                                 integrated environment and then port them back to the originating modeling
                                 environments. Once the team has decided upon a solution for a conflict identified
                                 in the review software, each trade must then make the necessary changes within
                                 their individual BIM software. Repeating the cycle of importing the models to the
                                 review software enables close to real-time coordination, especially if the detailers
                                 for the trades are co-located, as they were in the Camino Medical Group Building
                                 case study discussed below. In future systems it should be possible to report the
                                 clash back to each trade’s native BIM tool by using the component IDs (see
                                 Chapter 3 for a detailed explanation of these interoperability issues.)
                                      To avoid design coordination conflicts, the best practice is for detailed design
                                 to be performed in parallel and within collaborative work environments involv-
                                 ing all of the fabricating trades. This avoids the almost inevitable need for rework
                                 in the detailed design, even when conflicts in the completed designs have already
                                 been identified and resolved. Essentially, this was the process adopted in the
                                 Camino Medical Group Building project by DPR Construction and its trade sub-
                                 contractor partners (see Chapter 9). Detailers for plumbing, HVAC, sprinkler
                                 systems, electrical conduits, and other systems were collocated in a site office
                                 and detailed each of their systems in close proximity with one another and in
                                 direct response to the progress of fabrication and installation of the systems
                                 onsite. Almost no coordination errors reached the job site itself.
                                      Another significant waste occurs when inconsistencies appear within the
                                 fabricator’s own drawing sets. Traditional sets, whether drawn by hand or using
                                 CAD, contain multiple representations of each individual artifact. Designers
                                 and drafters are required to maintain consistency between the various drawings
                                 as the design development progresses and further changes are made. Despite




c07.indd 254                                                                                                       12/19/07 2:05:17 PM
                                                      7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators   255

               quality control systems of various kinds, entirely error free drawing sets are
               rare. A detailed study of drawing errors in the precast concrete industry, cover-
               ing some 37,500 pieces from various projects and producers, showed that the
               costs of design coordination errors amount to approximately 0.46% of total
               project costs (Sacks 2004).
                    Two views of drawings of a precast concrete beam are shown in Figure 7-3.
               They serve as a good example of how discrepancies can occur. Figure 7-3 (a)
               shows a concrete beam in an elevation view of the outside of the building; and
               Figure 7-3 (b) shows the same beam in a piece fabrication shop drawing. The
               external face of the beam had brick facing, which is fabricated by placing
               the bricks face down in the mold. The shop drawing should have shown the back
               of the beam up, i.e. with the bare concrete (internal to the building) face up in
               plan view. Due to a drafting oversight, the inversion was not made and the beam
               was shown with the external face up, which resulted in all eight beams in this
               project being fabricated as ‘mirror images’ of the actual beams needed. They
               could not be erected as planned – see Figure 7-3 (c) – which resulted in expen-
               sive rework, reduced quality, and construction delays.



                                                                                                       FIGURE 7-3
                                                                                                       Drawing inconsistency
                                                                                                       for a precast concrete
                                                                                                       spandrel beam:
                                                                                                       a) elevation, b) piece
                                                                                                       fabrication shop
                                                                                                       drawing drawn in
                                                                                                       mirror image in error,
                                                                                                       and c) the beams in
                                                                                                       place with mismatched
                                                                                                       end connection details.
                                                                                                       (Sacks et al. 2003)
                                                                                                       Reproduced from the
                                                                                                       Journal of the Precast/
                                                                                                       Prestressed Concrete
                                                                                                       Institute 48(3), with
                                                                                                       permission of the
                                                                                                       Precast/Prestressed
                                                                                                       Concrete Institute.




c07.indd 255                                                                                                            12/19/07 2:05:17 PM
          256 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 7.3.4 Lower Engineering and Detailing Costs
                                 BIM reduces direct engineering costs in three ways:

                                     • Through the increased use of automated design and analysis software
                                     • Almost fully automated production of drawings and material takeoffs
                                     • Reduced rework due to enhanced quality control and design coordination

                                      One major difference between BIM and CAD is that building information
                                 objects can be programmed to display seemingly ‘intelligent’ behaviors. This
                                 means that the preprocessing of data for analysis software of various kinds,
                                 from thermal and ventilation analyses to dynamic structural analyses, can be
                                 performed directly from BIM data or within the BIM tool itself. For example,
                                 most BIM tools used for structural systems enable the definition of loads, load
                                 cases, support conditions, material properties, and all other data needed for
                                 structural analyses, such as finite element analysis.
                                      It also means that BIM systems can allow designers to adopt a top-down
                                 design development approach, where the software propagates the geometric
                                 implications of high-level design decisions to its constituent parts. For example,
                                 the fine details of shaping pieces to fit to one another at connections can be
                                 carried out by automated routines based on pre-made custom components.
                                 The work of detailing the designs for production can, to a large extent, be
                                 automated. Apart from its other benefits, automated detailing directly reduces
                                 the number of hours that must be consumed to detail ETO components and to
                                 produce shop drawings.
                                      Most BIM systems produce reports, including drawings and material take-
                                 offs, in a highly automated fashion. Some also maintain consistency between
                                 the model and the drawing set without explicit action on the part of the opera-
                                 tor. This introduces savings in the number of drafting hours needed, which is
                                 particularly important to fabricators that previously spent the lion’s share of
                                 their engineering hours on the tedious task of preparing shop drawings.
                                      Various estimates of the extent of this direct productivity gain for engineer-
                                 ing and drafting with the use of BIM tools have been published (Autodesk
                                 2004; Sacks 2004), although few recorded measurements are available. One
                                 set of large-scale experiments was undertaken for the case of preparing
                                 construction drawings and detailing rebar for cast-in-place reinforced concrete
                                 structures using a BIM tool with parametric modeling, customizable automated
                                 detailing routines, and automated drawing preparation (Sacks and Barak
                                 2007). The buildings had previously been detailed using 2D CAD, and the
                                 hours worked were recorded. As can be seen in Table 7-2, the reduction in
                                 engineering and drafting hours for the three case study projects fell in the range




c07.indd 256                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:18 PM
                                                               7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators   257

               Table 7-2 Experimental data for three reinforced concrete building projects.
                Hours worked                       Project A              Project B             Project C

                Modeling                               131                    191                  140
                Reinforcement detailing                444                    440                  333
                Drawing production                      89                    181                  126
                Total 3D                               664                    875                  599
                Comparative 2D hours                 1,704                  1,950                  760

                Reduction                                61%                   55%                   21%



               of 21% to 61%. (Figure 7-4 shows axonometric views of the three cast-in-
               place reinforced concrete structures modeled in the study.)

               7.3.5 Increased Use of Automated Manufacturing
                     Technologies
               Computer-controlled machinery for various ETO component fabrication tasks
               has been available for many years. Examples include: laser cutting and drilling
               machines for structural steel fabrication; bending and cutting machines for fab-
               ricating reinforcing steel for concrete; saws, drills and laser projectors for timber
               truss manufacture; water jet and laser cutting of sheet metal for ductwork; pipe
               cutting and threading for plumbing; among others. However, the need for
               human labor to code the computer instructions that guide these machines
               proved to be a significant economic barrier to their use.
                    2D CAD technology provided a platform for overcoming data input barri-
               ers by allowing third-party software providers to develop graphic interfaces,
               where users could draw the products rather than coding them alphanumeri-
               cally. In almost every case, the developers found it necessary to add meaningful




               FIGURE 7-4 Axonometric views of projects A, B, and C.
               These models, prepared as part of an experiment to evaluate 3D modeling productivity, contain
               complete rebar details. The close-up image shows detailed rebars in a balcony slab and
               supporting beams.




c07.indd 257                                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:19 PM
          258 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 information to the graphics that represented the pieces to be fabricated by cre-
                                 ating computable data objects that represented building parts. They could then
                                 automatically generate parts and material takeoffs, resulting in what might be
                                 called ‘building part information modeling’ applications.
                                      The parts, however, continued to be modeled separately for each fabrica-
                                 tion stage. When changes were made to building systems, operators had to
                                 manually revise or reproduce the part model objects to maintain consistency.
                                 Apart from the additional time required, manual revision suffers the drawback
                                 that inconsistencies may be introduced. In some cases, such as for the struc-
                                 tural steel fabrication industry, software companies addressed this problem by
                                 developing top-down modeling systems for updating within assemblies and
                                 parts, so that a change would propagate almost entirely automatically to the
                                 affected pieces. These developments were constrained to certain sectors, such
                                 as the structural steel industry, where market size, the scale of economic bene-
                                 fit from use of the systems, and technological advances made investment in
                                 software development economically viable. These applications evolved into
                                 fully object-oriented 3D parametric modeling systems.
                                      BIM tools model every part of a building using meaningful and computable
                                 objects, and so provide information from which the data forms required for
                                 controlling automated machinery can be extracted with relative ease. Unlike
                                 their 2D-CAD based predecessors, however, they also provide the logistical
                                 information needed for managing the fabrication processes, including links to
                                 construction and production schedules, product tracking systems, etc.



                                 7.3.6 Increased Pre-Assembly and Prefabrication
                                 By removing or drastically reducing the overhead effort required to produce
                                 shop drawings, BIM tools make it economically feasible for companies to
                                 prefabricate a greater variety of pieces for any building project. Automatic
                                 maintenance of geometric integrity means that making a change to a standard
                                 piece and producing a specialized shop drawing or set of CNC instructions
                                 demands relatively little effort. More structurally diverse buildings, such as
                                 the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles (Post 2002) or the Beijing
                                 Aquatics Center (Chapter 9), become possible and increasingly more of the
                                 standard parts of buildings can be prefabricated economically.
                                      The trend toward prefabrication is encouraged by the relative reduction in
                                 risk associated with parts not fitting properly when installed. Each trade’s per-
                                 ception of that risk, or of the reliability of the design as a whole, is strongly
                                 influenced by the knowledge that all other systems are similarly and fully
                                 defined in 3D and reviewed together.




c07.indd 258                                                                                                   12/19/07 2:05:21 PM
                                                              7.3 The Benefits of a BIM Process for Subcontractor Fabricators   259

                    With few exceptions, 2D CAD did not give rise to new fabrication methods||,
               and it did little to aid the logistics of prefabrication offsite. BIM tools, on the
               other hand, are already enabling not only greater degrees of prefabrication than
               could be considered without them but also prefabrication of building parts that
               were previously assembled on site. For example, in the Camino Medical Group
               Building (described in detail in Chapter 9), large sections of pipes and plumb-
               ing fixtures were pre-assembled on stud frames and then rolled into place.
                    Because the tools support close coordination between building systems
               and trades, integrated prefabrication of building modules that incorporate parts
               of multiple systems is now feasible. Construction of the Staffordshire Hospital
               in the UK provided an excellent example of the use of integrated building mod-
               ules with parts from multiple systems (Court et al. 2006, Pasquire et al. 2006).
               Figure 7-5 shows how components of HVAC, plumbing, sprinkler, electrical,
               and communication systems can be assembled together in a module for simple
               installation in the ceiling of a corridor onsite. Coordinating the physical and
               logistical aspects of integration to this degree is only possible given the richness
               and reliability of the information provided by BIM tools.

               7.3.7 Quality Control, Supply Chain Management, and
                     Lifecycle Maintenance
               Numerous avenues for applying sophisticated tracking and monitoring technolo-
               gies in construction have been proposed and explored in various research projects.




               FIGURE 7-5 Prefabricated ceiling services modules with parts of HVAC, electric, and
               plumbing systems all installed together.
               a) Shows a 3D model view (Court et al. 2006) and b) shows factory prototypes (Pasquire et al.
               2006). Images courtesy of Crown House Technologies, Laing O’Rourke, UK.


               ||
               One notable exception is the BAMTEC system in which entire carpets of rebar, with customized
               bar diameters and lengths, are welded together and brought to site in rolls.




c07.indd 259                                                                                                                    12/19/07 2:05:21 PM
          260 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 They include: the use of radio-frequency ID (RFID) tags for logistics; comparing
                                 as-built structures to design models with laser scanning (LADAR); monitoring
                                 quality using image processing; and reading equipment ‘black box’ monitored
                                 information to assess material consumption. Many more are described in the
                                 ‘Capital Projects Technology Roadmap’ devised by FIATECH.
                                     For manufacturers of ETO products for construction, three main areas of
                                 application will be:

                                     • Monitoring of the production, storage, and delivery of components to
                                       the site using GPS and RFID systems;
                                     • Supporting the installation or erection of components and quality con-
                                       trol using LADAR and other surveying technologies;
                                     • Providing life-cycle information about components and their perform-
                                       ance using RFID tags and sensors.

                                      A common thread that runs through all of these proposed systems is the
                                 need for a building model to carry the information against which monitored
                                 data can be compared. The quantity of data that is typically collected by auto-
                                 mated monitoring technologies is such that sophisticated software is required
                                 to interpret them. For this interpretation to be meaningful, the designed state
                                 of the building product, both geometry and other product and process infor-
                                 mation, must be available in a computer-readable format.


                                      7.4 BIM-ENABLED PROCESS CHANGE

                                 As we have described in earlier chapters, BIM’s primary contribution for general
                                 contractors, subcontractors, and fabricators is that it enables virtual construc-
                                 tion. From the perspective of those directly responsible for producing buildings,
                                 whether onsite or in offsite fabrication facilities, this is not just an improvement
                                 but a new way of working. For the first time, construction managers and super-
                                 visors can practice putting the pieces together before they actually commit to the
                                 labor and materials. They can explore product and process alternatives, make
                                 changes to parts, and adapt the construction procedures in advance. And they
                                 can perform all of these activities in close collaboration with one another across
                                 different trades continuously and as construction progresses, allowing them to
                                 cope with unforeseen situations as they develop or deal with new changes intro-
                                 duced by owners and designers.
                                      Despite the fact that BIM software tools, as a whole, are not mature enough
                                 to make virtual construction simple and commonplace, best practices by




c07.indd 260                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:05:22 PM
                                                                                                7.4 BIM-Enabled Process Change   261

               leading construction teams throughout the world are already resulting in the
               process changes described below. Teams, such as those engaged in the Camino
               Medical Group Building and the GM Production Plant projects (case studies
               reported in Chapter 9), are setting the direction for progress. They are succeed-
               ing, not because they were expert at operating any one or other software, but
               as a result of the integrated way they exploited BIM technology to build virtu-
               ally and in a collaborative fashion early in the project.

               7.4.1 Leaner Construction
               In the manufacturing world, lean production methods evolved to meet individ-
               ual clients’ demands for highly customized products, without the waste inher-
               ent in traditional methods of mass production (Womack and Jones 2003). In
               general, the principles developed apply to any production system, but given the
               differences between production of consumer products and building construc-
               tion, adaptation of the manufacturing implementations was needed.
                    Lean construction is concerned with process improvement, so that buildings
               and facilities may be built to meet the clients’ needs while consuming minimal
               resources. This requires thinking about how work flows, with an emphasis on
               identifying and removing obstacles and bottlenecks. Lean construction places
               special focus on workflow stability. A common cause of long construction dura-
               tions are the long buffer times introduced by subcontractors to shield their own
               productivity where quantities of work made available are unstable and unpre-
               dictable. This occurs because subcontractors are reluctant to risk wasting their
               crews’ time (or reducing their productivity) in the event that other subcontrac-
               tors fail to meet their commitments to complete preceding work on time, or in
               case materials are not delivered when needed, or design information and deci-
               sions are delayed, etc.
                    One of the primary ways to expose waste and improve flow is to adopt pull
               flow control, in which work is only performed when the demand for it is made
               apparent downstream in the process, with the ultimate pull signal provided at
               the end of the process by the client. Work flow can be measured in terms of the
               overall cycle-time for each product or building section, the ratio of activities
               that are completed as planned, or the inventory of work in progress (known as
               ‘WIP’). Waste is not only material waste but process waste: time spent waiting
               for inputs, rework, etc1.


               1
                Readers interested in a brief introduction to the concepts of lean thinking are referred to the
               work of Womack and Jones (2003); references and links to the extensive literature on the subject
               of lean construction specifically can be found at the Web site of the International Group for Lean
               Construction (www.iglc.net).




c07.indd 261                                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:22 PM
          262 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                     BIM facilitates leaner construction processes that directly impact the way
                                 subcontractors and fabricators work in four ways:

                                    1. Greater degrees of prefabrication and pre-assembly driven by the avail-
                                       ability of error-free design information resulting from virtual construc-
                                       tion (the ways in which BIM supports these benefits are described in
                                       Section 7.3.5) translates to reduced duration of onsite construction and
                                       a shortened product cycle-time from the client’s perspective.
                                    2. Sharing models is not only useful for identifying physical or other design
                                       conflicts; shared models that are linked to planned installation timing data
                                       using 4D CAD techniques enable exploration of construction sequences
                                       and interdependencies between trades. Careful planning of production
                                       activities at the weekly level is a key tenet of lean construction. It is com-
                                       monly implemented using the ‘Last Planner™’ system (Ballard 2000),
                                       which filters activities to avoid assigning those which may not be able to
                                       be carried out correctly and completely. Thus, a priori identification of
                                       spatial, logical, or organizational conflicts through step-by-step virtual
                                       construction using BIM improves workflow stability.
                                    3. Enhanced teamwork: the ability to coordinate erection activities at a finer
                                       grain among different trades means that traditional interface problems –
                                       involving the handover of work and spaces from team to team – are also
                                       reduced. When construction is performed by better integrated teams, rather
                                       than by unrelated groups, fewer and shorter time buffers are needed.
                                    4. When the gross time required for actual fabrication and delivery is
                                       reduced – due to the ability to produce shop drawings faster – fabricators
                                       are able to reduce their lead times. If lead times can be reduced far enough,
                                       then fabricators will be able to reconfigure their supply to sites more easily
                                       to take advantage of the improved pull flow. This extends beyond just-
                                       in-time delivery to just-in-time production, a practice that substantially
                                       reduces inventories of ETO components and their associated waste: costs
                                       of storage, multiple-handling, damaged or lost parts, shipping coordina-
                                       tion, etc. Also, because BIM systems can generate reliable and accurate
                                       shop drawings at the last responsible moment – even when late changes
                                       are made – fabricators of all kinds can be more responsive to clients’ needs,
                                       because pieces are not produced too early in the process.

                                 7.4.2 Less Paper in Construction
                                 When CAD was adopted initially, electronic transfers became a partial alterna-
                                 tive to communicating paper drawings. The more fundamental change that
                                 BIM introduces is that drawings are relegated from the status of information




c07.indd 262                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:05:22 PM
                                                                                   7.4 BIM-Enabled Process Change   263

               archive to that of communicating medium, whether paper or electronic. In
               cases where BIM serves as the sole reliable archive for building information,
               paper printouts of drawings, specifications, quantity takeoffs, and other reports
               primarily serve to provide more easily legible access to the information.
                    For fabricators exploiting automated production equipment, as described
               in Section 7.3.5, the need for paper drawings largely disappears. For example,
               parts of timber trusses that are cut and drilled using CNC machines are effi-
               ciently assembled and joined on beds, where the geometry is projected from
               above using laser technology. Productivity for the assembly of complex rebar
               cages for precast concrete fabrication improves when the crew consults a color-
               coded 3D model, which they can manipulate at will on a large screen, instead
               of interpreting traditional orthogonal views on paper drawings. The delivery of
               geometric and other information to structural steel erectors onsite using PDAs
               that graphically display 3D VRML steel models (translated from CIS/2 models
               by NIST’s software) is a similar example (Lipman 2004).
                    The need for paper reports is greatly reduced as information from BIM
               fabrication models begins to drive logistics, accounting, and other management
               information systems and is aided by automated data collection technologies. It
               is, perhaps, only the slow pace of legal and commercial change that prevents
               this chapter from being titled ‘Paperless Construction.’


               7.4.3 Increased Distribution of Work
               The use of electronic building information models means that communication
               over long distances is no longer a barrier to the distribution of work. In this
               sense, BIM facilitates increased outsourcing and even globalization of two
               aspects of construction work that were previously the domain of local subcon-
               tractors and fabricators.
                    First, it is possible for design, analysis, and engineering to be carried out
               more easily by geographically and organizationally disperse groups. In the
               structural steel industry, it is becoming commonplace for individuals, armed
               with powerful 3D parametric detailing software, to become freelancers provid-
               ing services to fabricators that have greatly reduced their in-house engineering
               departments. Outsourcing of 3D modeling and plant engineering work to India
               in sectors like aerospace, automotive and industrial machinery is already
               common.
                    Second, better design coordination and communication means that fabri-
               cation itself can be outsourced more reliably, including shipping parts over
               long distances. In the case study describing the building at 100 11th Ave in
               New York City (Chapter 9), accurate BIM information enabled the production
               of facade components in China for installation in New York.




c07.indd 263                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:05:23 PM
          264 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                      7.5 GENERIC BIM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
                                          FOR FABRICATORS

                                 In this and the following section, we define the system requirements that ETO
                                 component fabricators, design service providers, and consultants should
                                 require from any software they are considering. This section defines generic
                                 requirements common to all and places special emphasis on the need for fabri-
                                 cators to participate actively in compiling comprehensive building information
                                 models as part of collaborative project teams. The following section (7.6)
                                 expands the list of requirements to include specialized needs of specific types
                                 of fabricators.
                                      Note that the most basic required properties of BIM systems, such as sup-
                                 port for solid modeling, are not listed, because they are essential for all users
                                 and almost universally available. For example, while fabricators require solid
                                 modeling tools for clash detection and volumetric quantity takeoffs, they are
                                 provided in all BIM software because section views cannot be produced auto-
                                 matically without them.


                                 7.5.1 Parametric and Customizable Parts and Relationships
                                 The ability to automate design and detailing tasks to a high degree – and for
                                 building information models to remain coherent, semantically correct, and accu-
                                 rate even as they are manipulated – are cornerstones for reaping the benefits of
                                 BIM for fabricators. Creating models would be excessively time-consuming and
                                 impractical if operators were required to generate each and every detailed object
                                 individually. It would not only be time-consuming but also highly error-prone if
                                 operators were required to actively propagate all changes, from building assem-
                                 blies to all of their detailed constituent components.
                                      For these reasons, fabricators must have software systems that support
                                 parametric objects and relationships between objects at all levels (parametric
                                 objects and relationships are defined in Chapter 2) in order to use BIM. The
                                 structural steel connection shown in Figure 7-6 illustrates this requirement.
                                 The software selects and applies an appropriate connection according to its
                                 pre-defined rules. (Setup and selection of rule sets for a project may be done by
                                 the engineer of record or by the fabricator, depending on the accepted prac-
                                 tice.) If the profile shape or parameters of either of the connected members are
                                 subsequently changed, the geometry and logic of the connection updates
                                 automatically.
                                      An important aspect to evaluate is the degree to which customized parts,
                                 details, and connections can be added to a system. A powerful system will




c07.indd 264                                                                                                   12/19/07 2:05:23 PM
                                                                7.5 Generic BIM System Requirements for Fabricators    265

                                                                                                      FIGURE 7-6
                                                                                                      Structural steel
                                                                                                      connection in Tekla
                                                                                                      Structures.
                                                                                                      The software applies
                                                                                                      the connection selected
                                                                                                      by the operator
                                                                                                      (A to B) and
                                                                                                      automatically updates
                                                                                                      the customized
                                                                                                      connection when the
                                                                                                      beam is made deeper
                                                                                                      and the column is
                                                                                                      rotated (B to C).



               support: nesting of parametric components within one another; modeling of
               geometric constraints, such as ‘parallel to’ or ‘at a constant distance from;’ and
               application of generative rules that determine whether a component will be
               created in any given context.

               7.5.2 Reporting Components for Fabrication
               The ability to automatically generate production reports for each individual
               ETO component in a building is essential for fabricators of all kinds. Reporting
               may include: preparation of shop drawings; compiling CNC machinery instruc-
               tions; listing constituent parts and materials for procurement; specifying surface
               finish treatments and materials; and listing hardware required for installation
               on site, etc.
                    In prefabrication of any type of ETO component, it is important to be able
               to group the components in different ways to manage their production (i.e.
               procurement of parts, preparation of forms and tools, storage, shipping and
               erection). Precast concrete parts and fabricated formwork pieces for cast-in-
               place concrete are commonly grouped according to their molds, so that single
               molds can be used for multiple parts with minor modifications between each
               use. Reinforcing bars must be produced and bundled in groups according to
               their association with building elements.
                    To support these needs, BIM tools should be able to group components
               according to criteria specified by operators on the basis of both their geometric
               information and meta-data. In the case of geometric shapes, the software should
               be able to distinguish between parts on the basis of the degree to which the pieces
               are similar or dissimilar. For example, timber trusses might be given a primary
               identifier for grouping those trusses with the same overall shape and configura-
               tion, while a secondary identifier could be used to distinguish sub-groups of one




c07.indd 265                                                                                                            12/19/07 2:05:23 PM
          266 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 or more trusses with minor differences within the primary group. If a generic truss
                                 family were given the type identifier ‘101,’ then a sub-group of a few trusses
                                 within the generic ‘101 family’ might include a particular member with a larger
                                 profile size that is otherwise the same as a ‘101’ and might be named sub-family
                                 ‘101-A’.
                                      In some applications, prefabricated ETO components will require that some
                                 of the constituent parts be delivered loose to the job site, such as weld plates for
                                 site joints. These too must be grouped and labeled to ensure delivery to the right
                                 place at the right time. Where parts must be cast into or bolted onto the build-
                                 ing’s structure, they may need to be delivered in advance to other subcontractors
                                 or even to other fabricators. All of this information must be generated and
                                 applied to the objects, preferably automatically, within the BIM tool.

                                 7.5.3 Interface to Management Information Systems
                                 A two-way interface to communicate with procurement, production control,
                                 shipping, and accounting information systems is essential in order to fully
                                 leverage the potential benefits detailed earlier in the chapter. These may be
                                 stand-alone applications or parts of a comprehensive enterprise resource plan-
                                 ning (ERP) suite. To avoid inconsistencies, the building information model
                                 should be the sole source for part lists and part production details for the full
                                 operation. Fabrication is performed over time, during which changes may
                                 continue to be made to the building’s design. Up-to-date information regarding
                                 changes made to pieces in the model must be available to all of a company’s
                                 departments at all times, if errors are to be avoided. Ideally, this should not be
                                 a simple file export/import exchange but an online database link. Minimally, the
                                 software should provide an application programming interface, so that compa-
                                 nies with access to programming capability can adapt data exchanges to the
                                 requirements of their existing enterprise systems.
                                      Where building information models are integrated with other management
                                 systems, automated tracking systems for ETO components, from production
                                 through storage, delivery, erection, and operation become feasible. Systems
                                 exploiting bar-code tracking are common, while the more powerful radio-
                                 frequency identification (RFID) technology has been shown to be feasible for
                                 only some ETO component types (Ergen et al. 2007).

                                 7.5.4 Interoperability
                                 By definition, subcontractors and fabricators provide only part of a building’s
                                 systems. The ability to communicate information between their BIM systems and
                                 those of the designers, general contractors, and other fabricators is essential.
                                 Indeed, one may conceive of a comprehensive building information model as
                                 consisting of the full set of system models maintained in the distinct BIM tools




c07.indd 266                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:05:24 PM
                                                                   7.5 Generic BIM System Requirements for Fabricators   267

               of the numerous design and construction trades, even if there is no one unified
               database.
                     The technical aspects of interoperability are discussed thoroughly in
               Chapter 3, including both its benefits and limitations. Suffice it to say that for
               the purposes of BIM tool selection by subcontractors and fabricators, the capa-
               bility to import and export models using an appropriate industry exchange
               standard should be considered mandatory. Which standard is most important
               depends on the industry sector: for structural steel the CIS/2 format is essen-
               tial; for most other sectors the IFC format will likely be most useful.

               7.5.5 Information Visualization
               A 3D building model view is a very effective platform for entering and visual-
               izing management information, particularly for erectors and general contractor
               staff outside the fabricator’s organization. Customizable functions for generat-
               ing model displays that are colored according to a variety of production status
               data are essential.
                    Two good examples are the use of 4D CAD techniques for micro-planning of
               a construction operation and the use of a model interface to pull the delivery
               of prefabricated parts to the job-site in a just-in-time configuration. In the first, a
               building model that included the structural members and the resources (cranes)
               and activities was used for step-by-step planning and simulation of the erection
               sequence for steel and precast concrete elements for an underground subway
               station roof in London, UK (Koerckel and Ballard 2005). Careful planning was
               essential so that the project team could meet a strict 48-hour time limit for erec-
               tion, during which train traffic was suspended. For a detailed description of 4D
               CAD techniques and benefits, please refer to Section 7 in Chapter 6.
                    The second example is illustrated by Figure 7-7 (a), which shows a spread
               of drawings laid out by a site supervisor to select precast pieces for delivery.
               The effort of coordinating between multiple sets of drawings and lists and the
               resultant human errors would be eliminated if the site supervisor could simply
               point and click on a color-coded model to compile delivery lists, as shown in
               Figure 7-7 (b).

               7.5.6 Automation of Fabrication Tasks
               The selection of a BIM software tool should reflect the opportunities and plans for
               automation of the fabrication tasks. These vary with each building system. Some
               companies will already have CNC machines of different kinds, such as rebar
               bending and cutting machines, laser cutters for steel profiles or plates, or sophis-
               ticated conveyor and casting systems for precast concrete. For some fabricators,
               these technologies may be drivers for adopting BIM; for others, they will be new,
               and BIM will enable their introduction. In either case, it is important to consider




c07.indd 267                                                                                                             12/19/07 2:05:24 PM
          268 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators




                                 FIGURE 7-7 a) Drawings spread by an erection supervisor to select precast pieces for
                                 delivery to the site. b) A model of a precast structure that has been color-coded according
                                 to availability of pieces for delivery to the site. Different colors (shown here in grayscale) are
                                 used to represent pieces that have been erected, pieces available, pieces currently in produc-
                                 tion, and pieces ready for production.

                                 the information requirements and the interfaces that are supported by the BIM
                                 software.


                                       7.6 MAJOR CLASSES OF FABRICATORS AND
                                           THEIR SPECIFIC NEEDS

                                 This section describes specific requirements for fabricators of various kinds. It
                                 also provides a short list of software packages (available at the time of publica-
                                 tion) for each class of fabricator. The software packages are listed in Table 7-3
                                 along with explanations of their functionality for each domain and sources for
                                 additional information.

                                 7.6.1 Structural Steel
                                 With steel construction, the overall structure is divided into distinct parts that
                                 can be easily fabricated, transported to the site, erected, and joined, using min-
                                 imal material quantities and labor, all under the necessary load constraints
                                 defined by the structural engineers.
                                     Simply modeling the structure in 3D with all detailing of nuts, bolts, welds,
                                 plates, etc. is not sufficient. The following are additional requirements that
                                 should be met by steel detailing software:

                                      • Automated and customizable detailing of steel connections. This fea-
                                        ture must incorporate the ability to define rule-sets that govern the ways
                                        in which connection types are selected and parametrically adapted to
                                        suit specific situations in structures.




c07.indd 268                                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:25 PM
               Table 7-3      BIM Software for Subcontractors and Fabricators.
                BIM Software                Building System Compatibility                 Functionality             Source for information

                Tekla Structures            Structural steel, Precast          Modeling, analysis                   www.tekla.com
                                            Concrete, CIP reinforced           pre-processing, fabrication
                                            concrete.                          detailing.
                                            Mechanical, Electrical,            Coordination
                                            Plumbing, Curtain walls

                SDS/2 Design Data           Structural steel                   Fabrication detailing                www.dsndata.com

                StruCAD                     Structural steel                   Fabrication detailing                www.acecad.co.uk

                Revit Structures            Structural steel, CIP reinforced   Modeling, analysis                   www.autodesk.com/revit
                                            concrete                           pre-processing

                Revit Systems               Mechanical, Electrical,            Modeling                             www.autodesk.com/revit
                                            Plumbing and piping

                3d⫹                         Structural steel                                                        3dplus.cscworld.com/

                Structureworks              Precast concrete                   Modeling, fabrication detailing.     www.structureworks.org

                Revit Building              Curtain walls                      Modeling                             www.autodesk.com/revit

                aSa Rebar Software          CIP reinforced concrete            Estimating, detailing, production,   www.asarebar.com
                                                                               material Tracking, accounting

                Allplan Engineering         Structural steel, CIP reinforced   Modeling, detailing rebar            www.nemetschek.com
                                            concrete, Precast concrete

                Allplan Building Services   Heating, Ventilation,              Modeling                             www.nemetschek.com
                                            Air-conditioning (HVAC),
                                            Mechanical, Electrical,
                                            Plumbing (MEP)

                Catia (Digital Project)     Curtain walls                      Modeling, FEM analysis, parsing      www.3ds.com
                                                                               production data for CNC

                Graphisoft ArchiGlazing,    Curtain walls                      Modeling                             www.graphisoft.com

                SoftTech V6 Manufacturer    Curtain walls                      Modeling and fabrication             www.softtechnz.com
                                                                               detailing

                CADPIPE Commercial Pipe     Piping and plumbing                Modeling and fabrication detailing   www.cadpipe.com

                CADPIPE HVAC and            HVAC ducts                         Modeling and fabrication             www.cadpipe.com
                Hanger                                                         detailing

                CADPIPE Electrical and      Electrical conduits, cable trays   Modeling, detailing                  www.cadpipe.com
                Hanger

                Quickpen PipeDesigner       Piping and plumbing                Modeling, fabrication detailing,     www.quickpen.com

                Quickpen DuctDedesigner     HVAC                               Modeling and fabrication detailing   www.quickpen.com

                Bentley Building            HVAC ducts and piping              Modeling                             www.bentley.com
                Mechanical Systems

                Graphisoft Ductwork         HVAC ducts                         Modeling                             www.graphisoft.com

                CAD-Duct                    HVAC ducts, Piping, Electrical     Modeling and fabrication             www.cadduct.com
                                            containment                        detailing

                SprinkCAD                   Fire sprinkler systems             Modeling and detailing               www.sprinkcad.com




c07.indd 269                                                                                                                             12/19/07 2:05:27 PM
          270 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                     • Built-in structural analysis capabilities, including finite element
                                       analysis. Alternatively, as a minimum, the software should be able to
                                       export a structural model, including the definition of loads in a format
                                       that is readable by an external structural analysis package. In this case, it
                                       should also be capable of importing loads back to the 3D model.
                                     • Output of cutting, welding, and drilling instructions directly to
                                       computer numerically controlled (CNC) machinery.

                                     Available software (see Table 7-3): Tekla Structures, SDS/2 Design Data,
                                 StruCAD, 3d⫹.

                                 7.6.2 Precast Concrete
                                 Information modeling of precast concrete is more complex than modeling struc-
                                 tural steel, because precast concrete pieces have internal parts (rebar, prestress
                                 strands, steel embeds, etc.), a much greater freedom in shapes, and a rich vari-
                                 ety of surface finishes. These were among the reasons why BIM software tailored
                                 to the needs of precast concrete became available commercially much later than
                                 for structural steel.
                                      The specific needs of precast concrete fabrication were researched and doc-
                                 umented by the Precast Concrete Software Consortium (PCSC) (Eastman et al.
                                 2001). The first two needs specified above (section 7.6.1) for structural steel –
                                 automated and customizable detailing of connections and built-in structural
                                 analysis capabilities – apply equally to precast concrete. In addition, the follow-
                                 ing requirements are specific to precast concrete:

                                     • The ability to model pieces in a building model with geometric shapes dif-
                                       ferent from the geometry reported in shop drawings. All precast pieces are
                                       subject to shortening and creep, which means their final shape is different
                                       than that which is produced. Precast pieces that are eccentrically pre-
                                       stressed become cambered when pre-stress cables are released after curing.
                                       The most complex change occurs when long precast pieces are deliberately
                                       twisted or warped. This is commonly done with long double tee pieces in
                                       parking garages and other structures to provide slopes for drainage, by
                                       setting the supports of one end at an angle to those of the other end. The
                                       pieces must be represented with warped geometry in the computer model,
                                       but they must be produced in straight pre-stressing beds. Therefore, they
                                       must be rendered straight in shop drawings. This requires a relatively com-
                                       plex geometric transformation between the assembly and the shop draw-
                                       ing representations of any intentionally deformed piece.
                                     • Surface finishes and treatments cannot simply be applied to faces of
                                       parts but often have their own distinctive geometry, which may require




c07.indd 270                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:05:27 PM
                                                           7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs   271

                     subtraction of volume from the concrete itself. Stone cladding, brick
                     patterns, thermal insulation layers, etc. are all common examples. Special
                     concrete mixes are used to provide custom colors and surface effects but
                     are usually too expensive to fill the whole piece. The pieces may be com-
                     posed of more than one concrete type, and the software must support the
                     documentation of volumes required for each type.
                   • Specialized structural analyses of individual pieces – to check their
                     resistance to forces applied during stripping, lifting, storage, transpor-
                     tation, and erection, which are different to those applied during their
                     service-life in a building – are required. This places special emphasis on
                     the need for integration with external analysis software packages and an
                     open application programming interface.
                   • The grouping of a precast piece’s constituent parts must be done accord-
                     ing to the timing of their insertion: cast into the unit at time of fabrica-
                     tion, cast into or welded onto the building foundation or structure, or
                     supplied loose (bundled with the piece) to the site for erection.
                   • Output of rebar shapes in formats compatible with fabrication control
                     software and automated bending and cutting machines.

                   Available software (see Table 7-3): Tekla Structures, Structureworks.

               7.6.3 Cast-In-Place (CIP) Reinforced Concrete
               Like precast concrete, cast-in-place reinforced concrete has internal compo-
               nents that must be modeled in detail. All of the requirements for structural
               analysis, generating and reporting rebar shapes for production and placing, and
               for measuring concrete volumes, are equally valid for cast-in-place concrete.
                    Cast-in-place (CIP) concrete, however, is quite different from both struc-
               tural steel and precast concrete, because cast-in-place structures are monolithic.
               They do not have clearly defined physical boundaries between components,
               such as with columns, beams, and slabs. Indeed, whether the concrete volume
               at the components’ intersection is considered part of one or part of the other
               component’s joint framing is determined based on the reporting needs. Likewise,
               the same rebars may fulfill a specific function within one member and a differ-
               ent function within a joint, such as with top steel in a continuous beam that
               serves for shear and crack resistance within the span but also as moment rein-
               forcement over the support.
                    Another difference is that cast-in-place concrete can conveniently be cast
               with complex curved geometries, with curvature in one or two axis directions
               and variable thicknesses. Although non-uniform multi-curved surfaces are
               rare, domes are not uncommon. Any company that encounters curved concrete
               surfaces in its construction projects should ensure that the descriptive geometry




c07.indd 271                                                                                                           12/19/07 2:05:28 PM
          272 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 engine of any modeling software can model such surfaces and the solid volumes
                                 they enclose.
                                      A third difference is, unlike steel and precast components, that CIP concrete
                                 structures are partitioned differently for analysis and design than for fabrica-
                                 tion. The locations of pour stops are often determined in the field and do not
                                 always conform to product divisions, as envisioned by the designers. Nevertheless,
                                 if the members are to be used for construction management as well as for design,
                                 they must be modeled both ways.
                                      Each of these scenarios requires a different multi-view approach to mode-
                                 ling objects than is available in most BIM software packages that currently offer
                                 some functionality for CIP concrete modeling. The ability to switch between
                                 distinct but internally consistent representations of 3D concrete geometry and
                                 idealized members for structural analysis, as provided in Revit Structures, rep-
                                 resents a first step in the right direction.
                                      Lastly, CIP concrete requires layout and detailing of formwork, whether
                                 modular or custom designed. Some modular formwork manufacturing compa-
                                 nies do provide layout and detailing software, which allows users to graphically
                                 apply standard formwork sections to CIP elements in 3D. The software then
                                 produces the detailed bills of material required and the drawings to aid laborers
                                 in erecting the modular forms. ‘ELPOS’ and ‘PERI CAD,’ provided by PERI
                                 of Germany, are two examples (http://www.peri.de/ww/en/pub/company/
                                 software/elpos.cfm). Unfortunately, the existing applications are based on CAD
                                 software representations, mostly using 2D views. The suppliers are more
                                 likely to provide BIM-integrated solutions as demand grows.
                                      Available software (see Table 7-3): Tekla Structures, Revit Structures, aSa
                                 Rebar Software integrated with Microstation, Nemetschek Allplan Engineering.

                                 7.6.4 Curtain Walls and Fenestration
                                 Curtain walls include any wall closing system that does not have a structural
                                 function, i.e. it does not carry gravity loads to the foundations of a building.
                                 Among custom-designed and fabricated curtain walls – essentially involving
                                 ETO components – aluminum and glass curtain walls are typical. They can be
                                 classified as stick systems, unit systems, or composite systems. In this chapter,
                                 fenestration includes all window units that are custom-designed for fabrication
                                 and installation in a specific building, with profiles of steel, aluminum, timber,
                                 plastic (PVC), or other materials.
                                     Stick systems are built in-situ from metal profiles (usually aluminum), which
                                 are attached to the building frame. They are similar to structural steel frames in
                                 that they are composed of longitudinal extruded sections (vertical mullions and




c07.indd 272                                                                                                    12/19/07 2:05:28 PM
                                                           7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs   273

               horizontal transoms) with joints between them. Like precast facade panels, their
               connections to the structural frame must be detailed explicitly for every context.
               They place a unique requirement on modeling software, because they are highly
               susceptible to changes in temperature, which cause expansion and contraction;
               as such, their joints must be detailed to allow for free movement without com-
               promising their insulating or aesthetic functions. Joints with appropriate degrees
               of freedom and sleeves to accommodate and hide longitudinal movement are
               common. Stick systems require only assembly modeling, with no need for piece
               fabrication detail drawings. The ability to plan erection sequences in order to
               accommodate tolerances is critical.
                    Unit systems are composed of separate prefabricated pieces installed
               directly onto the building’s frame. A key feature for modeling is the need for
               high accuracy in construction, which means that dimensional tolerances for the
               building’s structural frame should be modeled explicitly.
                    Composite systems include unit and mullion systems, column cover and
               spandrel systems, and panel (strong back) systems. These require not only
               detailed assembly and piece fabrication details but must also be closely coordi-
               nated with a building’s other systems.
                    Curtain walls are an important part of any building information model,
               because they are central to all analyses of building performance other than
               overall structural analysis (i.e. thermal, acoustic, and lighting). Any computer
               simulation that can be performed on a model will need the relevant physical
               properties of the curtain wall system and its components – not only its geome-
               try. Models should also support local wind and dead load structural analyses
               for the system components.
                    Most curtain wall modeling routines that are commonly available in archi-
               tectural BIM systems allow for preliminary design only and have no functional-
               ity for detailing and fabrication. The 100 11th Ave., New York, case study in
               Chapter 9, which presents a complex curtain wall designed for a residential
               building, serves as a good example of this type of use. On the other hand, wide-
               spread manufacturing detailing software systems for curtain walls and fenes-
               tration, such as the DeMichele Group packages, are intended for modeling
               individual windows or curtain wall sections, without compiling them into
               whole building models. Due to the nature of the steel and aluminum profiles
               used in most curtain walls, some companies have found mechanical parametric
               modeling tools, such as Solidworks and Autodesk Inventor, to be more useful.
                    Available software (see Table 7-3): Digital Project (Catia), Tekla Structures,
               Revit Building, Nemetschek Allplan, Graphisoft ArchiGlazing, SoftTech V6
               Manufacturer.




c07.indd 273                                                                                                           12/19/07 2:05:28 PM
          274 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 7.6.5 Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing (MEP)
                                 Three distinct types of ETO component systems are included in this category:
                                 ducts for HVAC systems; piping runs for water and gas supply and disposal; and
                                 routing trays and control boxes for electrical and communication systems. These
                                 three systems are similar both in nature and in the space they occupy within a
                                 building, but they also depend on specific requirements for detailing and fabri-
                                 cation software.
                                      Ducts for HVAC systems must be cut from sheet metal sections, fabricated
                                 in units that can be conveniently transported and maneuvered into position,
                                 and then assembled and installed in place at a building site. Duct units are
                                 three dimensional objects and often have complex geometries.
                                      Piping for supply and disposal of various liquids and gases is composed of
                                 extruded profiles that also incorporate valves, bends, and other equipment.
                                 While not all piping is engineered-to-order, any sections that require cutting,
                                 threading, or other treatments that must be done in a workshop prior to deliv-
                                 ery are considered ETO components. In addition, spools of piping components
                                 that are pre-assembled as complete units prior to delivery and/or installation
                                 are also considered pre-engineered, even if most or all of their constituent
                                 parts are off-the-shelf components.
                                      Although electrical and communication cables are largely flexible, the con-
                                 duits and trays that carry them may not be, which means their layout must be
                                 coordinated with other systems.
                                      The first and most generic requirement for these systems to be supported
                                 by BIM is that their routing in space must be carefully coordinated. Routing
                                 requires easy-to-follow or color-coded visualization and system tools for iden-
                                 tifying clashes between systems. Figure 7-8, which was prepared by a general
                                 contractor (the Mortenson Company) for coordination purposes, is an excel-
                                 lent example of how a building’s MEP systems can be modeled, checked, and
                                 prepared for fabrication, production, and installation.
                                      Although physical clash detection is available in most piping and duct soft-
                                 ware, in many cases soft clash detection is also needed. Soft clash detection
                                 refers to certain requirements, where minimum clear space must be maintained
                                 between different systems, such as the minimum distance between a hot water
                                 pipe and electrical cables. The software must allow users to set up rules that
                                 define verifiable spatial constraints between different pairs of systems when
                                 clash checks are performed.
                                      A second generic requirement is the grouping of objects for production and
                                 installation logistics. Numbering or labeling components must be performed on
                                 three levels: a unique part ID for each piece; a group ID for installation spools;
                                 and a production group ID that the system assigns based on the collection of
                                 identical or largely similar parts for fabrication or procurement. Grouping




c07.indd 274                                                                                                    12/19/07 2:05:29 PM
                                                           7.6 Major Classes of Fabricators and Their Specific Needs     275

                                                                                                       FIGURE 7-8
                                                                                                       A model view
                                                                                                       showing a building’s
                                                                                                       MEP systems with
                                                                                                       transparent building
                                                                                                       structure components,
                                                                                                       prepared by a general
                                                                                                       contractor (Mortenson)
                                                                                                       for construction
                                                                                                       coordination.
                                                                                                       (See color insert for full
                                                                                                       color figure.) Image
                                                                                                       provided courtesy of
                                                                                                       Mortenson.




               of parts for site delivery, with collections of separate components belonging to
               duct runs and pipe spools, is particularly important. If any part is missing or
               cannot fit into place due to dimensional changes or fabrication errors, produc-
               tivity degrades and the workflow is disrupted. To avoid this, BIM systems must
               provide material takeoff lists and seamless integration with logistics software for
               labeling schemes to allow complete and correct collections of parts to be pulled
               to the work-face at the right time. One technology for aiding this is the use of
               bar-codes to track pipe spools and duct sections. A less mature method is the
               use of radio frequency identification (RFID) tags.
                    Unique BIM requirements for each of the systems are as follows:

                   • Most duct sections are fabricated from flat sheet metal. Software should
                     generate cutting patterns – unfolded from 3D geometric shapes – and
                     translate the data into a format appropriate for plasma cutting tables
                     or other machinery. The software should also offer optimization of the
                     nesting pattern to minimize off-cut waste.




c07.indd 275                                                                                                              12/19/07 2:05:29 PM
          276 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                     • Piping spools are commonly represented in symbolic isometric drawings.
                                       Software should enable display in multiple formats, including full 3D rep-
                                       resentation, line representation, and symbolic form, as well as 2D plans,
                                       sections, and isometric views. In addition, it should automatically gener-
                                       ate spool assembly drawings with bill of material data.

                                      Software applications capable of generating detailed models and fabrica-
                                 tion information for MEP systems were made available earlier than for other
                                 building systems. This was mainly because ducts, pipes, etc, are generally com-
                                 posed of distinct parts, which have standard geometries that are independent
                                 of local conditions at the interfaces between parts. Solid modeling and Boolean
                                 operations were not needed, and self-contained parametric parts could be
                                 added by programming purpose-built routines. It was therefore possible to
                                 provide fabrication level modeling on the basis of generic CAD software, which
                                 lacked more sophisticated parametric and constraint modeling capabilities.
                                      The drawback of CAD-based applications, as opposed to BIM based appli-
                                 cations, is that CAD platforms do not maintain logical integrity when changes
                                 are entered. Neighboring duct sections should adjust when changes are made
                                 to individual sections or to a duct run as a whole. When a duct or pipe that
                                 penetrates a slab or wall moves, the hole in the slab or wall should either also
                                 be moved or healed if it is no longer needed. Many MEP applications lack the
                                 import and export interfaces needed for industry-wide interoperability, such as
                                 support for IFC models.
                                      Subcontractors and fabricators are likely to continue using CAD-based
                                 tools, such as those listed below, because the BIM software packages that offer
                                 MEP capabilities (at the time of this book’s publication) – such as Revit Systems
                                 and Bentley Building Mechanical Systems – do not extend to the production of
                                 detailed fabrication drawings. For this reason, it is important to ensure that any
                                 CAD-based tool is capable of supporting file formats that can be uploaded into
                                 design coordination programs like Navisworks Jetstream (Navisworks 2007).
                                      Available software (see Table 7-3): Quickpen (PipeDesigner and DuctDe-
                                 signer), CADPIPE (HVAC, Commercial Pipe, Electrical, Hanger), CAD-Duct,
                                 SprinkCAD, Revit Systems, Bentley Building Mechanical Systems, Graphisoft
                                 Ductwork.


                                      7.7 ADOPTING BIM IN A FABRICATION OPERATION

                                 A robust management strategy for the adoption of BIM must concern aspects
                                 beyond software, hardware, and the training of engineering staff, because of its
                                 range of impact on workflows and people.




c07.indd 276                                                                                                    12/19/07 2:05:30 PM
                                                                      7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation   277

                    BIM systems are a sophisticated technology that impacts every aspect of
               a fabrication subcontractor’s operations, from marketing and estimating
               through engineering, procurement of raw materials, fabrication, shipping to
               installation onsite, and maintenance. BIM does not simply automate existing
               operations that were previously performed manually or using less sophisti-
               cated software, it enables different workflow patterns and production
               processes.
                    BIM systems directly improve engineering and drafting productivity. Unless
               a company experiences sustained growth in sales volume through the adoption
               period, the number of people needed for these activities will be reduced.
               Downsizing may be threatening to employees whose energy and enthusiasm is
               critical for changing work procedures. A thorough plan should account for this
               impact by considering and making provisions for all staff, both those selected
               for training and those for whom other tasks may be found. It should aim to
               secure involvement and commitment at an early stage.

               7.7.1 Setting Appropriate Goals
               The following guideline questions may help in setting goals for an effective
               adoption plan and for identifying the actors inside and outside the company
               who should be party to the plan. They apply equally to fabrication companies
               with in-house detailing capabilities and to companies that specialize in provid-
               ing engineering detailing services.

                   • How can clients (building owners, architects, engineering consultants,
                     and general contractors) benefit from fabricators’ enhanced proficiency
                     using BIM tools? What new services can be offered that presently are
                     not? What services can be made more productive, and how can lead-
                     times be shortened?
                   • To what degree can building model data be imported from upstream
                     sources, such as from architects’ or other designers’ BIM models?
                   • How early in the process will models be compiled? At the tendering
                     stage or once a contract has been won? What is the appropriate level of
                     detail for a tendering stage model?
                   • If a tendering model has been prepared, how much of the information
                     compiled is useful for the engineering and detailing phase that follows
                     if the project is won?
                   • How and by whom will the company’s standard engineering details and
                     drawing templates be embedded in custom library components in the
                     software? Will libraries be compiled at the time of adoption or incre-
                     mentally as-needed for the first projects modeled?




c07.indd 277                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:05:30 PM
          278 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                     • Can BIM offer alternative modes of communicating information within
                                       the company? This requires open discussion with different departments
                                       to ascertain real needs. Asking a production department head, “How
                                       do you want your shop drawings to look?” may miss the point in a BIM
                                       adoption, where alternative forms of presenting the information may
                                       be possible. Viewing, manipulating and querying models on screen is a
                                       viable addition to traditional drawings. People need to be informed of
                                       the new possibilities.
                                     • How will information be communicated to consultants in the submittal
                                       process? BIM-capable architects and engineering consultants are likely
                                       to prefer to receive the model rather than drawings. How will review
                                       comments be communicated back to the company?
                                     • How will the information generated be communicated within the company
                                       and between the production and logistics departments? To what degree
                                       will building information models be used to generate or display manage-
                                       ment information? What is needed (software, hardware, programming)
                                       to integrate BIM systems with existing management information systems,
                                       or will new management systems be adopted in parallel? Most BIM soft-
                                       ware vendors provide not only fully functional authoring versions but
                                       also limited functionality viewing or reporting versions at lower prices
                                       than the full package. Such versions are likely to be adequate for produc-
                                       tion or logistics departments and personnel.
                                     • What is the appropriate pace of change? This will depend on freeing-up
                                       the time of those individuals committed to the company’s BIM adoption
                                       activities.
                                     • How and to what degree will the existing CAD software be phased
                                       out? How much buffer capacity should be maintained during the adop-
                                       tion process? Are there any clients or suppliers who will not move to BIM
                                       and may therefore require that a limited CAD capacity be maintained?
                                     • What are the needs and capabilities of any suppliers to whom engineering
                                       work is outsourced? Will they be expected to adapt? Will the company
                                       provide them some support in making the transition to BIM, or will they
                                       be replaced with BIM-savvy engineering service providers?

                                 7.7.2 Adoption Activities
                                 Once software and hardware configurations have been selected, the first step
                                 will be to prepare a thorough adoption plan, starting with definitions of the
                                 goals to be achieved and selection of the right staff to lead the adoption, both
                                 as managers and as first learners. Ideally, the adoption plan will be developed




c07.indd 278                                                                                                  12/19/07 2:05:31 PM
                                                                        7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation   279

               together with or by the selected leaders in close consultation with key people
               from the production and logistics departments company-wide. The plan should
               detail timing and personnel commitments for all of the following activities:

                   • Training engineering staff to use the software. A word of caution: 3D
                     object modeling is sufficiently dissimilar in concept from CAD drawing
                     that some experienced CAD operators find the need to ‘unlearn’ CAD
                     behavior a serious barrier to effective use of BIM software. As with most
                     sophisticated software, proficiency is built with practice over time; staff
                     should not be trained until the organization can ensure that they can
                     devote time to continued use of the software in the period immediately
                     following the training.
                   • Preparation of custom component libraries, standard connections,
                     design rules, etc. For most systems and companies, this is a major task,
                     but on the other hand it is a key determinant of the level of productivity
                     that can be achieved. Different strategies can be considered. Custom
                     components can be defined and stored incrementally as-needed on the
                     first projects performed; a large proportion of the libraries can be built
                     ahead of time; or a mixed approach is possible. Larger companies may
                     elect to dedicate a specially trained staff member to compile and main-
                     tain part libraries, because parametric modeling libraries are consider-
                     ably more complex and sophisticated than those used with 2D CAD.
                   • Customization of the software to provide drawing and report templates
                     suitable for the company’s needs.
                   • Immediately after training, the ‘first learners’ can be tasked with ‘ghost-
                     ing’ a project. This involves attempting to model a project that is
                     being produced in parallel using the standard CAD software. Ghosting
                     provides an opportunity to explore the breadth of a real project, while
                     not bearing responsibility to produce results according to production
                     schedules. It also reveals the limitations of training and the degree of
                     customization that will have been achieved.
                   • Seminars and/or workshops for those impacted but who are not direct
                     users – other departments within the company, raw material and processed
                     product suppliers, providers of outsourced services, and clients – to inform
                     them of the capabilities, enlist their support, and solicit ideas for improved
                     information flows that may become possible. In one such seminar at a
                     precast concrete company, the manager of the rebar cage assembly shop
                     was asked to comment on various options for shop drawing dimensioning
                     formats. Instead, he responded by asking if he could have a computer for




c07.indd 279                                                                                                          12/19/07 2:05:31 PM
          280 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                                      3D viewing of rebar cages color-coded by bar diameters, which he felt
                                                      would enable his team to understand the cages they were to tie in a fraction
                                                      of the time they currently needed to interpret 2D drawing sets.

                                            7.7.3 Planning the Pace of Change
                                            The introduction of new BIM workstations should be phased. The personnel
                                            undergoing training are likely to remain unproductive during their training and
                                            less productive than with CAD tools during the early period, as they progress
                                            along a learning curve. The first people trained are also likely to be unproduc-
                                            tive for a longer period than most others, because they will have to customize
                                            the software to suit company-specific products and production practices. In
                                            other words, there is likely to be a need for additional personnel at the early
                                            stages of adoption, followed by a fairly sharp drop. This can be seen in the total
                                            number of personnel needed, as shown in the last row of each adoption plan in
                                            Table 7-4.
                                                 Table 7-4 shows a feasible plan for a phased replacement of a company’s
                                            existing 18 CAD workstations with 13 BIM workstations. It lists the numbers
                                            of CAD and BIM workstations planned for operation in each of the first four
                                            periods following the introduction of BIM software. It is based on estimates for
                                            two unknowns: the degree of expected productivity gain and anticipated rate


          Table 7-4 Staged adoption of BIM workstations for a fabricator’s engineering department.
               Adoption periods                               Start        P1         P2          P3          P4
               Plan ignoring growth in work volume

               Equivalent CAD workstations required            18          18         18          18          18
               CAD workstations operating                      18          18         13           3
               CAD workstations saved                                                  5          15          18
               BIM workstations added                                       3          6           2
               BIM workstations operating                                   3          9          11          11
               Total workstations                              18          21         22          14          11

               Plan considering growth in work volume

               Equivalent CAD workstations required            18          18         19          20          21
               CAD workstations operating                      18          18         14           5
               CAD workstations saved                                                  5          15          21
               BIM workstations added                                       3          6           3           1
               BIM workstations operating                                   3          9          12          13
               Total workstations                              18          21         23          17          13




c07.indd 280                                                                                                                   12/19/07 2:05:31 PM
                                                                      7.7 Adopting BIM in a Fabrication Operation   281

               of growth in business volume, if any. The rate of growth in volume can be
               expressed conveniently in terms of an equivalent number of CAD workstations
               needed to cope with the volume (the table shows two options, ignoring and
               considering growth in work volume). The rate of productivity gain used to pre-
               pare this table is 40% and is based on the number of hours required to pro-
               duce the same output using BIM as would be produced using CAD. In terms of
               drawing production, that translates to 60% of the hours currently spent using
               CAD. This is a conservative estimate based on available measures from
               research, as detailed in Section 7.3.4 above.
                   Table 7-4 also demonstrates how downtime for training and reduced pro-
               ductivity at the start of the learning curve can be accounted for. A simplifying
               assumption in this regard is that the BIM workstations introduced in each
               period will only become fully productive in the period that follows. Thus, there
               is no reduction in CAD workstations in the first adoption period, despite the
               addition of three BIM workstations. In the second period, the reduction in
               CAD workstations is five and is equal to the number of BIM workstations that
               become productive (three, the number added in the preceding period) divided
               by the productivity ratio (3/60%⫽5).
                   The increase in personnel needed during the first adoption period may be
               ameliorated by outsourcing or by overtime, but it is likely to be the main cost
               item in a BIM adoption cash flow plan and usually significantly more costly
               than the software investment, hardware, or direct training costs. Companies
               may decide to stagger the adoption gradually to reduce its impact; indeed,
               planning period durations may be reduced over time (integrating new opera-
               tors is likely to be smoother once more colleagues have made the conversion
               and as the BIM software becomes more deeply integrated in day-to-day proce-
               dures). In any event, from a management perspective, it is important to ensure
               that the resources needed for the period of change will be recognized and made
               available.

               7.7.4 Human Resource Considerations
               In the longer term, the adoption of BIM in a fabricator’s organization is likely
               to have far-reaching effects in terms of business processes and personnel.
               Achieving the full benefits of BIM requires that estimators, who are commonly
               among the most experienced engineers in a fabrication organization, be the
               first to compile a model for any new project, because it involves making deci-
               sions about conceptual design and production methods. This is not a task that
               can be delegated to a draftsperson. When projects move to the detailed design
               and production stages, it will again be the engineers who are capable of apply-
               ing the correct analyses to models and, at least, the engineering technicians




c07.indd 281                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:05:32 PM
          282 Chapter 7 BIM for Subcontractors and Fabricators

                                 who will determine the details. For trades such as electrical, HVAC and piping,
                                 communications, etc., detailing should be done in close collaboration with a
                                 general contractor and other trades to ensure constructability and correct
                                 sequencing of work, which again requires extensive knowledge and under-
                                 standing of the domain.
                                      As observed in Chapter 5 (BIM for the design professions), here too the
                                 skill set required of BIM operators is likely to result in a decline of the tradi-
                                 tional role of drafting. Companies should be sensitive to this in their adoption
                                 plan, not only for sake of the people involved but because BIM adoption may
                                 be stifled if the wrong people are expected to pursue it.



                                      7.8 CONCLUSIONS

                                 In purely economic terms, subcontractors that fabricate engineered-to-order
                                 components for buildings may have more to gain from BIM than any other par-
                                 ticipant in the building construction process. BIM directly supports their core
                                 business, enabling them to achieve efficiencies that fabricators in other sectors,
                                 such as the automotive industry, have achieved through the application of
                                 computer-aided modeling for manufacturing.
                                      There are numerous potential benefits for fabricators. These include:
                                 enhanced marketing and tendering; leveraging the ability to rapidly produce
                                 both visualizations and accurate cost estimates; reduced production cycle-times,
                                 allowing fabrication to begin at the last responsible moment and accommodate
                                 late changes; reduced design coordination errors; lower engineering and detail-
                                 ing costs; increased use of automated manufacturing technologies; increased
                                 pre-assembly and prefabrication; various improvements to quality control and
                                 supply chain management resulting from the integration of BIM with ERP sys-
                                 tems; and much improved availability of design and production information for
                                 life-cycle maintenance.
                                      While almost all fabricators and subcontractors can benefit from better
                                 coordination between their work packages and those of their peers, each trade
                                 can benefit in more specific ways, depending on the nature of their work. In
                                 this chapter, BIM practices were described in detail for a small number of
                                 trades: structural steel, precast concrete, cast-in-place concrete, curtain wall
                                 fabrication, and MEP trades. This is not meant to imply that BIM cannot be
                                 used effectively for other trades; we encourage every trade to consider and
                                 develop its opportunities, whether through organized group action or persist-
                                 ent trial-and-error by individual companies.




c07.indd 282                                                                                                    12/19/07 2:05:32 PM
                                                                                     7.8 Conclusions   283


               Chapter 7 Discussion Questions
                      1. List three examples of engineered-to-order (ETO)
                         components of buildings. Why do fabricators of ETO
                         components prepare shop drawings?
                      2. What is the difference between made-to-stock and
                         made-to-order components? Provide examples of each in
                         the construction context.
                      3. How can BIM reduce the cycle-time for marketing,
                         detailed design, fabrication, and erection of ETO
                         components in construction? Select one type of component
                         and use its process to illustrate your answers.
                      4. Why are pre-assembled integrated system modules, such
                         as those described in Section 7.3.6, very difficult to
                         provide using traditional CAD systems? How does BIM
                         resolve the problems?
                      5. What are the ways in which BIM can facilitate lean
                         construction?
                      6. What are the features of BIM systems that enable ‘push of
                         a button’ changes to details of the kind shown in 7.6?
                      7. Imagine that you are assigned responsibility for the
                         adoption of BIM in a company that fabricates and
                         installs HVAC ducts in commercial and public buildings.
                         The company employs six detailers who use 2D CAD.
                         Discuss your key considerations for adoption and outline
                         a coherent adoption plan, citing major goals and
                         milestones.
                      8. What are the features of building information models, and
                         what are the process benefits they bring, as opposed to
                         2D drawing practices, that make global procurement of
                         ETO components possible and economical?




c07.indd 283                                                                                           12/19/07 2:05:33 PM
               CHAPTER                       8
               The Future: Building with BIM



                      8.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

                    IM is not a thing or a type of software but a human activity that ultimately
               B    involves broad process changes in construction.
                    Already, a wide variety of owners are demanding BIM and changing con-
               tract terms to enable it. New skills and roles are developing. Successful pilot
               implementations in construction are leading to corporate-wide uptake by pio-
               neering contractors; and construction contractors are implementing sophisti-
               cated ERP systems. A survey conducted in early 2007 found that 74% of US
               architectural firms are already using 3D modeling and BIM tools, although only
               34% of those use it for intelligent modeling. BIM-standard efforts—such as the
               National BIM Standards in the US—are gathering steam; and the public is
               increasingly demanding greener buildings. BIM and 4D CAD tools are becom-
               ing common in construction site offices. The lack of appropriately trained
               professional staff, rather than the technology itself, is the current bottleneck to
               widespread implementation.
                    The technology trends include the development of automated checking for
               code conformance and constructability using building information models.
               Some vendors have expanded the scope of their BIM tools, while others offer
               more discipline-specific functionality, such as construction management func-
               tions. It is becoming more common for building product manufacturers to
               provide 3D catalogs; and BIM is helping to make globalization of fabrication
               for increasingly complex building sub-assemblies economically viable.



               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   285



c08.indd 285                                                                                                                       12/19/07 2:06:43 PM
          286 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                      But BIM is a work in progress. As it develops and its use becomes more
                                 widespread, the extent of its impact on the way in which buildings are built
                                 will become more apparent. In this chapter, we first extrapolate from these
                                 trends to the short-term future. The next five years are likely to see much
                                 broader adoption of basic BIM tools. BIM will contribute to a higher degree of
                                 prefabrication, greater flexibility and variety in building methods and types,
                                 fewer documents, far fewer errors, less waste, and higher productivity. Build-
                                 ing projects will perform better, thanks to better analyses and exploration of
                                 more alternatives, fewer claims, and fewer budget and schedule overruns.
                                 These are all improvements on existing construction processes.
                                      Numerous societal, technical, and economic drivers will determine the
                                 development of BIM in the mid-term future (10–12 years). The latter part of
                                 this chapter identifies the drivers and obstacles in the timeframe leading up to
                                 2020. We reflect on the likely impacts of the drivers on BIM technology, on the
                                 design professions, on the nature of construction contracts and the synergy
                                 between BIM and lean construction, on education and employment, and on
                                 statutory and regulatory processes.
                                      The big picture is that BIM will facilitate early integration of project design
                                 and construction teams, making closer collaboration possible. This will help
                                 make the overall construction delivery process faster, less costly, more reliable,
                                 and less prone to errors and risk. This is an exciting time to be an architect, an
                                 engineer, or any other AEC industry professional.



                                      8.1 INTRODUCTION

                                 BIM is beginning to change the way buildings look, the way they function, and
                                 the ways in which they are built. Throughout this book, we have intentionally
                                 and consistently used the term BIM to describe an activity (building information-
                                 modeling), rather than an object (as in building information model). This reflects
                                 our belief that BIM is not a thing or a type of software but a human activity that
                                 ultimately involves broad process changes in construction. In this chapter, we
                                 aim to provide two perspectives on the future of building using BIM: where BIM
                                 is taking the AEC industry, and where the AEC industry is taking BIM.
                                      We begin with a short introduction describing the conception and matura-
                                 tion of BIM until the present (2007). We then provide our perspectives on what
                                 the future holds. The forecast is divided into two timeframes: a fairly confident
                                 forecast of the near future that looks ahead to the next five years (until 2012)
                                 and a more speculative long-term forecast looking ahead to the year 2020. The
                                 near-term forecast reflects current market trends—many discussed in earlier




c08.indd 286                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:06:43 PM
                                                                          8.2 The Development of BIM Up To 2007   287

               chapters of this book—and then reviews current research. The long-term fore-
               cast relies on analyses of likely drivers and a fair amount of intuition. Beyond
               2020, potential advances in hardware and software technologies as well as
               business practices, make it impossible to predict anything reliably, and so we
               refrain from speculation.
                    After 2020, construction industry analysts will reflect, with the benefit of
               hindsight, on the process changes that will have occurred by 2020. They will
               likely find it difficult to distinguish definitively between such influences as
               BIM, lean construction, and performance-driven design. In the absence of
               each other, these techniques could, theoretically, flourish on their own. Their
               impacts, however, are complementary in important ways, and they are being
               adopted simultaneously. Practical examples of their synergies are apparent in
               some of the case studies in the following chapter (such as the GM Production
               Plant, the Camino Group Medical Building, and the Federal Office Building).
               We address some of these synergies in sections 8.2 and 8.3.



                    8.2 THE DEVELOPMENT OF BIM UP TO 2007

               BIM technology has crossed the boundary between research concept and viable
               commercial tool, and it is set to become as indispensable to building design and
               construction as the proverbial tee square or hammer and nail. The transition to
               BIM, however, is not a natural progression from computer-aided drafting (CAD).
               It involves a paradigm shift from drawing to modeling, and it facilitates—and is
               facilitated by—a concurrent shift from traditional competitive project delivery
               models to more collaborative practices in design and construction.
                    The concept of computer modeling for buildings was first proposed when
               the earliest software products for building design were being developed (Bijl
               and Shawcross 1975; Eastman 1975; Yaski 1981). Progress toward BIM was
               restricted first by the cost of computing power and later by the successful wide-
               spread adoption of CAD. But idealists in academia and the construction
               software industry persisted, and the research needed to make BIM practical
               continued to move forward. The foundations for object-oriented building prod-
               uct modeling were laid throughout the 1990s (Gielingh 1988; Kalay 1989;
               Eastman 1992). Parametric 3D modeling was developed both in research and
               by software companies for specific market sectors, such as structural steel. Cur-
               rent BIM tools are the fulfillment of a vision that has been predicted, by many,
               for at least two decades.
                    BIM technology will continue to develop rapidly. Just as the concepts of
               how BIM tools should work drove their technological development, a renewed




c08.indd 287                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:06:44 PM
          288 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 vision of the future of building with BIM—emphasizing workflows and
                                 construction practices—is now needed. Readers who are considering the adop-
                                 tion of BIM tools for their practices and educators teaching future architects,
                                 civil engineers, contractors, building owners, and professionals, should all
                                 understand not only the current capabilities but also the future trends and their
                                 potential impacts on the building industry.



                                      8.3 CURRENT TRENDS

                                 Market and technology trends are good predictors of the near-term future in
                                 any field, and BIM is no exception. The trends observed reveal the potential
                                 direction and influence BIM will have in the construction industry. The following
                                 paragraphs outline the trends that influence our forecast. They are summarized
                                 in the box on the following page.
                                      Sophisticated owners are beginning to demand BIM and to change
                                 contract terms to enable it. The General Services Administration (GSA) of the
                                 US federal government, representing a sophisticated owner, demands the use of
                                 BIM models that are capable of supporting automated checking to determine
                                 whether the design meets program requirements. Civilian construction for the
                                 DOD is requiring that all of their projects be based on BIM. Sutter Health, a
                                 California medical services provider with a multi-billion dollar construction
                                 program, is actively encouraging the use of BIM by its providers as an integral
                                 part of its lean construction practices. The Swire Properties One Island East
                                 case study (Chapter 9) is an example of a project in which an enlightened
                                 owner of a major skyscraper demanded the use of BIM. Statsbygg, an owner/
                                 developer company responsible for procuring all public construction for the
                                 Norwegian government, has begun to demand BIM use. All of these owners are
                                 motivated by the economic benefits they perceive to be inherent in building
                                 with BIM. Indeed, the heavy engineering and process plant industries have
                                 relied on 3D modeling for engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC)
                                 for over a decade.
                                      New skills and roles are developing. The productivity gain for the docu-
                                 mentation stage of precast and cast-in-place concrete structures has been meas-
                                 ured in case studies and researched in numerous contexts, and has been found
                                 to be in the range of 30%–40%. Although reliable numerical data is not yet
                                 available for architectural design, the trend observed is similar, and the impli-
                                 cation is downsizing of drafting staff in building design practices of all kinds.




c08.indd 288                                                                                                   12/19/07 2:06:44 PM
                                                                                                  8.3 Current Trends   289


                 BIM Process and Technology Trends
                 Process trends
                 • Owners are demanding BIM and changing contract terms to enable its use.
                 • New skills and roles are developing.
                 • In a recent survey, 25% of US architectural firms reported using BIM tools for ‘intelligent
                   modeling.’
                 • Successful pilot implementations in construction are leading to corporate-wide uptake by
                   pioneering contractors.
                 • The benefits of running an integrated practice are broadly recognized.
                 • Construction contractors are implementing sophisticated ERP systems.
                 • Standards efforts are gathering steam.
                 • Green building is increasingly demanded by clients.
                 • BIM and 4D CAD tools are becoming common tools in construction site offices.

                 Technology Trends
                 • Automated checking for code conformance and constructability using building information
                   models is becoming available.
                 • Major BIM tools are adding functionality and integrating capabilities of other products,
                   providing even richer platforms for use.
                 • Vendors are increasingly expanding their scope and providing discipline-specific BIM tools.
                 • Building product manufacturers are beginning to provide 3D catalogs.
                 • BIM tools with construction management functions are becoming increasingly available.
                 • BIM is encouraging the globalization of prefabrication for increasingly complex building
                   sub-assemblies




               This may be compensated, to a degree, by the addition of modeling roles by
               architects and engineers.
                    25% of US architectural firms surveyed in 2007 reported already using
               BIM tools for ‘intelligent modeling.’ More specifically, 74% of the firms
               surveyed reported using 3D/BIM tools, but only 34% of those claimed they use
               it for ‘intelligent modeling’ (i.e. not simply for the generation of 2D drawings




c08.indd 289                                                                                                           12/19/07 2:06:45 PM
          290 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 and visualizations) (Gonchar 2007). Five years ago, the use of intelligent mod-
                                 eling was rare.
                                      Successful pilot implementations in construction are leading pioneering
                                 contractors to re-engineer their processes, by taking corporate-wide advantage
                                 of these early benefits. Pilot projects that made early intensive use of what
                                 were still imperfect BIM tools—and showed dramatic success—have indicated
                                 the nature of the technology’s impact on construction. Among the cases studies
                                 in Chapter 9, the GM Production Plant showed how BIM can facilitate design-
                                 build projects; the Camino Group Medical Building showed how BIM is essential
                                 in enabling lean pull flow control for detailing of MEP systems, resulting in a high
                                 degree of pre-assembly; and the Penn National parking structure showed how
                                 prefabrication can be almost entirely error-free. A recent survey sponsored by the
                                 Construction User’s Round Table indicates, “A growing proportion of early adop-
                                 ters report plans to transform their organizational strategy” (CIFE 2007).
                                      The benefits of integrated practice are broadly recognized. Leading architec-
                                 tural firms are beginning to recognize that future building processes will require
                                 integrated practice of the whole construction team and will be facilitated by BIM.
                                 All members of the building team, not only the engineering consultants but con-
                                 tractors and fabricators, are recognized to have valuable input for design. This is
                                 leading to new forms of partnerships, with more design-build projects, more con-
                                 struction firms incorporating their own design offices, and more innovative and
                                 intensive teaming. The GM Flint Plant and the 100 11th Ave. New York City case
                                 studies exemplify this trend.
                                      Construction contractors are implementing sophisticated ERP systems.
                                 A parallel—but as yet unrelated—development is the increasing adoption of
                                 enterprise resource planning (ERP) software systems by general contractors.
                                 These systems, which are common in other industries but are now being adopted
                                 in construction, connect purchasing, accounting, inventory, and project planning
                                 at the company level for multiple projects (Grilo and Jardim-Goncalves 2005).
                                 Once the back-office systems are automated and in place, construction organi-
                                 zations will begin to integrate these systems with their CAD, 3D, and BIM
                                 systems (Eastman et al. 2002). Several European companies are beginning to
                                 integrate their 3D/BIM tools with Oracle ERP and model server technologies
                                 (Dunwell 2007, Neuberg 2007).
                                      Standards efforts are gathering steam. In the US, the National Institute
                                 for Building Sciences (NIBS) has begun facilitating industry definition of a set
                                 of National BIM Standards, which aims to smooth out data exchange within
                                 specific construction workflows. Organizations like the Association of General
                                 Contractors (AGC) have already published the BIM Guidelines, which provides
                                 advice on how to best leverage the technology. In 2006, the American Institute




c08.indd 290                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:06:45 PM
                                                                                                    8.3 Current Trends   291

               of Steel Construction amended its code of standard practice to require that a
               3D model, where it exists, be the representation of record for design informa-
               tion. All major BIM tool vendors now support, to a lesser or greater degree,
               some form of IFC standard exchange.
                    Green building is increasingly demanded by a public conscious of the
               threats of climate change. BIM helps building designers achieve environmen-
               tally sustainable construction, by providing tools for the analysis of energy
               needs and for accessing and specifying building products and materials with
               low environmental impact. The use of natural ventilation in the San Francisco
               Federal Building, as described in the case study in Chapter 9, provides a good
               example of this synergy.
                    BIM and 4D CAD tools are becoming commonplace in construction site
               offices. Over the past decade, 4D tools have gradually moved from the research lab
               (McKinney et al. 1996; McKinney and Fischer 1998) to the construction office
               and site (Haymaker and Fischer 2001; Schwegler et al. 2000; Koo and Fischer
               2000). BIM use is evident onsite in both the One Island East and the Camino
               Medical Group Building case studies in Chapter 9. Today, all major BIM tool ven-
               dors provide 4D functionality, and several smaller companies also sell 4D tools.
                    Automated checking for code conformance and constructability using
               building information models has become available. In Singapore, part of the
               design checks of building code compliance required for building licenses
               are already automated. Innovative companies, such as Solibri and EPM, have
               developed model-checking software (Jotne 2007; Solibri 2007) using IFC files
               and are intent on extending their capabilities. Coordination between complex
               building systems using superimposed 3D models is becoming common.
                    Vendors are increasingly expanding their scope and providing discipline-
               specific BIM tools. Major BIM vendors are adding discipline-specific interfaces,
               objects, design rules, and behaviors to the same base parametric modeling
               engine (witness ‘XXX Building/Architect’, ‘XXX Structure’, ‘XXX MEP’, etc.).
               These vendors have also extended the scope of their software capabilities by
               acquiring structural analysis applications. One such vendor has purchased a
               building systems coordination application; another is developing a sophisticated
               contractor site management application.
                    Building product manufacturers are beginning to provide 3D catalogs.
               Products as diverse as JVI mechanical rebar splices, Andersen windows, and
               many others can be downloaded as 3D objects and inserted parametrically into
               models from several online sites.
                    Construction management functions are being integrated into BIM tools.
               The extension of 4D CAD to include cost—what is called 5D CAD—and
               further extension to incorporate additional management parameters to nD CAD




c08.indd 291                                                                                                             12/19/07 2:06:45 PM
          292 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 are already being undertaken by various solution providers. These promise to
                                 offer better insight into how projects can be built feasibly and reliably. The
                                 concept of virtual construction is no longer familiar only to the research com-
                                 munity. It is increasingly being used and appreciated in practice, as indicated
                                 by the recent Virtual Design and Construction Survey (VDC) (CIFE 2007).
                                 Constructor 2007 (VicoSoftware 2007) is an example of this trend; Innovaya
                                 (Innovaya 2007) is another.
                                      BIM is helping to make the fabrication of increasingly complex building
                                 sub-assemblies economically and globally viable. Large curtain wall system
                                 modules are already being fabricated in China, at costs and quality that cannot
                                 be matched in the developed world (see the 100 11th Ave. New York City case
                                 study in Chapter 9 for an example). The need for transport time allowances
                                 means that lead-times for design are short, and the modules must be fabricated
                                 right the first time. BIM produces reliable and error-free information and short-
                                 ens lead-times.
                                      The process and technology trends outlined above were formative in our
                                 attempt to look ahead at the future of building with BIM, in this chapter’s
                                 following sections. BIM, however, is not developing in a vacuum. It is a computer-
                                 enabled paradigm change, and so its future will also be influenced by developments
                                 in Internet culture and by other similar and less predictable drivers.



                                      8.4 VISION 2012

                                 Recent years have witnessed the realization of many of the ideas of BIM visionar-
                                 ies, and the next five years will see increasing numbers of successful implementa-
                                 tions, changes in the building industry, and new trial uses and extensions of what
                                 can be achieved with BIM, beyond its use today. This period will see the transition
                                 of BIM from an early adoption technology to accepted mainstream practice; and
                                 the transition will impact all building professionals and participants. But the
                                 greatest impact will be on the individual practitioner, who will need to learn to
                                 work, design, engineer, or build with BIM.

                                 8.4.1 Impact on the Design Professions:
                                       Shifting Services and Roles
                                 Designers will experience productivity gains and deliver higher quality services. In
                                 the next five years, building designers will continue to adopt BIM, and by the end
                                 of the period, 60–70% of firms will have worked on a project making full use of
                                 BIM, compared to the 25% that use it today (Gonchar 2007). The two main
                                 drivers for broad adoption will be: 1) client demand for enhanced quality of




c08.indd 292                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:06:46 PM
                                                                                                          8.4 Vision 2012   293

               service; and 2) productivity gain in preparing documentation. The competitive
               advantage BIM provides will motivate individual firms to adopt BIM, not only
               for the sake of internal improvement but to gain a competitive advantage in the
               marketplace.
                    The most significant shift for design firms will be in the quality and nature
               of their services. Currently, designers mostly rely on experience and rule-of-
               thumb judgments regarding cost, functional performance, and energy and envi-
               ronmental impacts of their designs. Most of their time and effort is spent pro-
               ducing project documents and on meeting explicit owner requirements. Some of
               the case studies and sections in this book note how early adopters of BIM are
               beginning to move towards performance-based design, by utilizing tools to bet-
               ter inform their design decisions. Design firms (with a push from clients) will
               begin to broaden their scope of services to include detailed energy and environ-
               mental analyses, operations analyses within facilities (such as for healthcare),
               and value engineering throughout the design process, based on BIM-driven cost
               estimates; and these are just a few of the possibilities. Initially, these services will
               be market differentiators. Later, some will become common practices for all. As
               these firms develop their new technical environments and expertise with BIM,
               the late adopters or non-BIM design firms will find it increasingly difficult to
               compete and will be forced to either adapt or die.
                    Architecture and engineering firms will face a workplace with changing
               roles and activities. Junior architects will be expected to demonstrate proficiency
               with BIM as a condition of employment, in the same way that CADD profi-
               ciency has been required since the 1990s. Some downsizing will occur among
               staff members dedicated to document producing activities. New roles will
               emerge with titles such as the building modeler or model manager, requiring
               design and technical know-how. The model manager will work with the project
               team to update the building model, guarantee origin, orientation, naming and
               format consistency, and to coordinate the exchange of model components with
               internal design groups and external designers and engineers.
                    As detailing and documentation production phases become increasingly auto-
               mated in various areas of engineering, cycle times for processing will be signifi-
               cantly reduced. These trends were already witnessed in the Penn National and the
               100 11th Ave. New York case studies (see Chapter 9). Little’s Law (Hopp and
               Spearman 1996), which relates cycle times and levels of work-in-progress to
               throughput, explains that for any given workload, reducing cycle times means that
               the level of work in progress is reduced. The implication is that firms should be
               able to reduce the number of projects they have in active design at any given time
               in their practices. Thus, some of the waste inherent in moving employees’ atten-
               tion from one project to another at frequent intervals may be reduced.




c08.indd 293                                                                                                                12/19/07 2:06:46 PM
          294 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                      BIM tools and processes will facilitate the trend first enabled by the Internet
                                 to divest and outsource services, leading to further empowerment of small firms
                                 with a highly technical and BIM-skilled staff. Increased opportunities will exist
                                 to provide freelance technical or very specialized design services in response to
                                 the ever-growing complexity of building systems and materials. Four of the ten
                                 case studies in Chapter 9 benefited from outside specialist advisors contributing
                                 to the use of BIM (the San Francisco Federal Office Building, 100 11th Avenue
                                 New York City, the Beijing National Aquatics Center, and the One Island East
                                 Hong Kong project). Consortia of specialist design firms are able to collaborate
                                 around a common building model, often achieving outstanding team results in
                                 shorter times than was ever possible with drawings. This makes it both efficient
                                 and practical for such firms to provide new design and performance analy-
                                 ses and/or production advice under the leadership of the primary design firm,
                                 which may be a large innovative firm or a small firm with high design and coor-
                                 dination skills. In some ways, we may see an acceleration of the trend described
                                 in Section 5.3 and a similar evolution of design services that we saw over the
                                 last forty years in contracting services. The contracting design firm will do a
                                 reduced amount of work but will coordinate and integrate the work of multiple
                                 specialist advisors. These trends are evident today and will grow incrementally
                                 to respond to the increasing complexity of design services.
                                      Although much will change, many aspects of building design will stay
                                 rooted in current practice. In the short term, the majority of clients, local regu-
                                 latory authorities, and contractors will continue to demand drawings and paper
                                 documentation for projects. Many non-leading design practices will only use
                                 BIM to generate consistent drawings, for team communication, and for hand-
                                 off to contractors. Only a minority of firms will have shown the way to integrate
                                 building performance capabilities with standard general design functions.

                                 8.4.2 Impact On Owners: Better Options, Better Reliability
                                 Owners will experience changes in the quality and nature of services available and
                                 an overall increased reliability of the project budget, program compliance,
                                 and delivery schedule. Many owners are already experiencing this. Chapter 4 and
                                 several of the case studies describe owners who were introduced to new processes
                                 and deliverables. Within the next five years, owners can expect the changes in the
                                 design professions—discussed in the previous section—to translate into more
                                 offerings by service providers to deliver a building information model and to per-
                                 form services related to analyzing, viewing, and managing the model.
                                      In the early project phases, owners can expect to encounter more 3D
                                 visualizations and conceptual building information models with programmatic
                                 analysis (see Chapter 5 for a discussion of these tools). Three-dimensional models
                                 and 4D simulations produced from building information models are far more




c08.indd 294                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:06:47 PM
                                                                                                     8.4 Vision 2012    295

               communicative and informative to lay people than technical drawings. With the
               increasing availability of 3D-based internet technologies, like earth viewers and
               virtual communities, owners will have more options to view project models
               and use them for marketing, sales, and evaluation of designs in the site context.
               Building information models are also far more flexible, immediate, and inform-
               ative than computer-renderings of buildings produced using CAD technolo-
               gies; and they enable owners and designers to generate and compare more
               design options early in the project, when decisions have the most impact on the
               project and life-cycle costs.
                    These technical developments will have different impacts for different
               owners, depending on their business incentives. Owners who build to sell will
               find that they can demand and achieve much shorter design durations for con-
               ceptual design and construction documentation. On the other hand, for own-
               ers who have an economic interest in the life-cycle costs and energy efficiency
               of their buildings, the conceptual design stage will provide the opportunity for
               an in-depth study of the behavior of each alternative building design. Savvy
               owners—with the perception that conceptual-level models can be developed
               and evaluated rapidly—are likely to express greater demand for design quality.
               In an effort to optimize building design, they will demand thorough explora-
               tion of more alternatives, in terms of construction cost, sustainability, energy
               consumption, lighting, acoustics, maintenance, and operations.
                    During this time period, more advanced analysis and simulation tools will
               emerge as options for specific types of facilities, such as healthcare, public
               access areas, stadiums, transit facilities, civic centers, and educational centers.
               Figure 8-1 shows an example of a tool that allows healthcare owners and their


                                                                                                        FIGURE 8-1
                                                                                                        Example of a
                                                                                                        component-based
                                                                                                        simulation of an
                                                                                                        operating room,
                                                                                                        allowing the owners
                                                                                                        and designers to
                                                                                                        compare different
                                                                                                        equipment.
                                                                                                        The equipment
                                                                                                        components include
                                                                                                        parameters and
                                                                                                        behaviors, ensuring
                                                                                                        that proper clearances
                                                                                                        and distances are
                                                                                                        maintained.
                                                                                                        Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                        of View22 and GE
                                                                                                        Healthcare.




c08.indd 295                                                                                                             12/19/07 2:06:47 PM
          296 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                     designers to compare different configurations of hospital rooms with different
                                     equipment. Since the actual occupants and users are central to assessing and
                                     evaluating any design, tools that work integrally with a BIM system to provide
                                     intelligent configuration capabilities will become more widespread.
                                          Similarly, sophisticated construction clients will drive the development of
                                     automated design review software for different building types. These will assess
                                     a given building design at different stages of development and according to dif-
                                     ferent preset guidelines. For example, the GSA is already extending its program
                                     area checking tool to other aspects of design and other building types. One
                                     program beginning to be implemented allows for circulation assessments of
                                     various layout options during conceptual design. It focuses on courthouses,
                                     which have major circulation and security requirements. An early example of
                                     this type of testing is shown in Figure 8-2. Other public or private organiza-
                                     tions can be expected to develop similar protocols for other building types,
                                     such as hospitals and schools.
                                          For first-time (and often one-time) construction clients, different and less
                                     desirable possibilities may occur. They may not be familiar with BIM and its
                                     potential uses and, as a result, inadequately engage the design team in assessing
                                     the project’s more subtle goals regarding function, cost, and time-to-delivery. If



          FIGURE 8-2
          A courthouse
          circulation path that
          fails to provide secure
          access between a
          trial jury room and a
          restroom.
          The system checks the
          security zones of all
          possible paths, which
          may span multiple floors
          (GT-COA 2007; Solibri
          2007).




c08.indd 296                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:06:49 PM
                                                                                                     8.4 Vision 2012   297

               designers are not disciplined, they can develop fairly detailed designs rapidly
               and create building models that appear convincing and appealing. If the vital
               stage of conceptual design is short-circuited, premature production level mod-
               eling can lead to a lot of rework later in the process. In the worst cases, inad-
               equately designed buildings that do not meet the clients’ needs may be built.
               Like any powerful technology, BIM too is open to abuse. Building clients
               unfamiliar with the capabilities that BIM technology offers are advised to
               educate themselves and select knowledgeable design consultants in order
               to obtain professional design service that exploits the technological capabilities
               of BIM to achieve the desired objectives of the project.
                    Smart owners, on the other hand, will demand a faster and more reliable
               building process from their design and construction teams. The use of design-
               bid-build for private construction will continue to decline, as owners realize
               that an integrated team is the best way to obtain value from BIM technology.
               They will start measuring BIM teams by the number of change orders and
               delays on prior projects (get it right the first time). The number of claims should
               go down as the design and construction process becomes more efficient. Law-
               yers and expert witnesses will become a smaller part of the owner’s life (and
               fears). Time and cost contingencies will shrink. Clients that build frequently
               will look for teams of design and construction professionals that have BIM
               experience and know how to leverage these tools with lean processes.
                    As the use of 4D and BIM-coordination by contractors becomes more
               commonplace, owners will increasingly appreciate the power of these tools to
               improve budget and schedule reliability as well as overall project quality. They
               will begin to require status reports, schedules, and as-builts in BIM formats.
               More owners will seek out model managers or require that their construction
               manager perform this task and facilitate the model management network,
               either as a central model repository or one that is distributed across the project
               teams. Thus, owners will increasingly face the challenge of managing and stor-
               ing the building information models. They may also need to address intellec-
               tual property issues, if individual members of collaborative teams contribute
               proprietary information (Thomson and Miner 2006).
                    Post-construction, owners will consider whether or not to utilize the model
               for facility management, as discussed in Chapter 4. If they choose to do so,
               they will need to learn how to update and maintain it. During this time period,
               we can expect increased use and maturation of BIM-based facility management
               products. We will see the first cases of building information models integrated
               with building monitoring systems for comparing and analyzing predicted and
               observable building performance data, which will provide owners and opera-
               tors with better tools for managing their building operations.




c08.indd 297                                                                                                           12/19/07 2:06:49 PM
          298 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 8.4.3 Impact on Construction Companies:
                                       BIM at the Construction Site
                                 Construction companies, for competitive advantage, will seek to develop BIM
                                 capabilities both in the field and in the office. They will use BIM for 4D CAD
                                 and for collaboration, clash detection, client reviews, production manage-
                                 ment, and procurement. In many ways, they will be in a better position than
                                 most other participants in the construction supply chain for leveraging the
                                 short-term economic benefits of ubiquitous and accurate information.
                                      Chapters 6 and 7 explained how BIM can contribute to reducing construc-
                                 tion budgets and schedules, as a result of better quality designs (i.e., fewer
                                 errors) and by enabling greater degrees of prefabrication. A positive effect of the
                                 ability to develop design details fairly early in the process is that rework, which
                                 commonly results from unresolved details and inconsistent documentation, is
                                 mostly eliminated. These effects have already been reported in case studies—
                                 such as the Camino Group Medical Building and the 100 11th Ave. New York
                                 project in Chapter 9 and in pioneering projects like the Denver Art Museum
                                 Extension—but they are likely to become widespread only toward the end of the
                                 time-window considered in this section (2012).
                                      Some mechanical parametric modeling software companies may develop
                                 products for different types of construction fabrication that are designed for
                                 and integrated with NC fabrication equipment. This will allow new custom-
                                 fabricated products to become part of construction, including molded plastic
                                 panels, novel kinds of ductwork, and others.
                                      This period should see increasingly smoother transitions from design
                                 models to construction models. Software wizards—using parametric templates
                                 of work packages with embedded construction methods—will be applied, to
                                 rapidly compile a construction model from a design model. Ideas like the recipes
                                 in Constructor 2007 software (Vico Software 2007) are an early indication of
                                 what can be expected. For example, a parametric template for a post-tensioned
                                 flat slab will lay out the formwork design and determine labor and equipment
                                 inputs, material quantities, and delivery schedules based on a generic slab object
                                 in a design model. A resulting construction model can be analyzed for cost,
                                 equipment, and logistic constraints and for schedule requirements; and the
                                 alternatives can be compared. Thus, construction planning will be greatly
                                 enhanced. The parametric templates will also serve as a repository for corporate
                                 knowledge; in as far as they will embed an individual company’s way of working
                                 into these software applications.
                                      The role of the building modeler will be an issue among contractors and
                                 fabricators, due to the mixed roles of senior staff and the complexity of some




c08.indd 298                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:06:50 PM
                                                                                                    8.4 Vision 2012      299

                                                                                                      FIGURE 8-3 Laser
                                                                                                      scanning point cloud
                                                                                                      data can be mapped
                                                                                                      onto BIM objects to
                                                                                                      show deviations of the
                                                                                                      as-built geometry from
                                                                                                      the designed geometry.
                                                                                                      The colors represent
                                                                                                      the degree of deviation
                                                                                                      from the planned (gray)
                                                                                                      surfaces, according to
                                                                                                      the scale at the left
                                                                                                      of the figure (see color
                                                                                                      insert for full color
                                                                                                      figure). Image courtesy
                                                                                                      of Elsevier (Akinci et al.
                                                                                                      2006).




               detailing systems. As third party engineering service detailers for precast, rein-
               forced concrete, and other systems gain proficiency in BIM, they will become
               the de facto building modelers in the same way as in the steel fabrication busi-
               ness. Also, BIM sets the scene for the use of automated surveying and other
               data collection technologies. For example, laser scanning can produce point
               cloud surveys of existing physical geometry. Interpretation of the point clouds
               for generating meaningful building objects that can be used in a building infor-
               mation model is possible, but it is a time-consuming endeavor that limits the
               technology’s use for most situations. When matched to a 3D model, as shown
               in Figure 8-3, point cloud data can be used directly to highlight deviations of
               the as-built geometry from the designed geometry (Akinci et al. 2006).

               8.4.4 Impact on Construction Contracting: Closer Collaborations
                     Among Designers and Contractors
               As we have noted in Chapter 6, BIM provides considerably more advantages in
               the context of design-build type procurement arrangements. As design and
               construction companies gain experience with BIM, recognition of the added-
               value that can be achieved will push them to move building procurement from




c08.indd 299                                                                                                              12/19/07 2:06:50 PM
          300 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 design-bid-build to negotiated contracts, cost-plus, design-build, and aug-
                                 mented design arrangements.
                                      Some construction companies will expand their services in the areas of
                                 model development and management. Others may provide package services
                                 for full building delivery through a leveraged use of BIM technology.
                                      Both the Internet and BIM tools will facilitate increasing degrees of globali-
                                 zation in construction, not only in the design and parts supply but in the fabrication
                                 of engineered-to-order components of increasing complexity. The fabrication of
                                 the steel and glass panels of the curtain wall system for the 100 11th Avenue,
                                 New York City case study project is an early example. The accuracy and reliability
                                 of production data prepared using BIM allowed building products and assem-
                                 blies that would traditionally be procured locally to be made anywhere in the
                                 world. Curtain wall panels are one example. Large modular pre-fabricated utility
                                 systems or complete bathroom units may be others. Competition in the construc-
                                 tion fabrication area will spread globally.

                                 8.4.5 Impact on Construction Education:
                                       Integrated Education
                                 Leading schools of architecture and civil engineering have already begun teach-
                                 ing BIM to undergraduates in their first year, and that trend is likely to spread
                                 in parallel with the adoption of BIM in the design professions. The third
                                 authors’ experience to date in teaching BIM is that students are able to grasp
                                 the concepts and become productive using BIM tools more quickly than they
                                 were with CAD tools.
                                     The current lack of trained personnel remains a barrier to BIM adoption,
                                 forcing many companies to retrain experienced CAD operators in the new
                                 tools. Because BIM requires different ways of thinking about how designs are
                                 developed and building construction is managed, retraining requires not only
                                 learning but the unlearning of old habits, which is difficult. New graduates,
                                 whose entire undergraduate experience was influenced by their familiarity with
                                 BIM and its use for the full range of student projects, are likely to have a pro-
                                 found influence on the way companies of all kinds deploy BIM. Inevitably, a
                                 good deal of innovation in work practices is to be expected.

                                 8.4.6 Impact on Statutory Authorities: Planting the Seeds of
                                       Online Access and Review
                                 One possible impact of the Internet is its ability to empower the public at-large
                                 to participate in statutory processes, such as the approval or rejection of build-
                                 ing plans. Posting building designs for public review, however, is rare. One of
                                 the reasons may be that the accepted format of drawings is not accessible to the




c08.indd 300                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:06:51 PM
                                                                                                        8.4 Vision 2012   301

               average citizen. If navigable 3D models of proposed buildings were placed
               within a realistic depiction of their context and posted online, a more demo-
               cratic public review process would be feasible.
                    Visual inspection is already technically possible within the Google Earth®
               environment, but the idea can be extrapolated to envisage the merging of multi-
               ple information sources to create a virtual environment in which design and
               approval takes place using BIM. Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are
               commonplace in many municipal jurisdictions and utility services. The data
               includes topographical conditions, infrastructure facilities, existing structures,
               environmental and climate conditions, and statutory requirements. The challenges
               of interoperability for this kind of GIS information are not quite as complex as
               they are for exchanging intelligent building models; it may become possible and
               economically viable for jurisdictions to provide models in packages for individual
               project sites, which could be delivered to building designers for use directly
               within their BIM authoring tools.
                    Green or sustainable construction practices are likely to get a boost from
               BIM, because building information models can be analyzed for compliance with
               energy consumption standards, for their use of green construction materials, and
               for other factors included in certification schemes like LEED. The ability to objec-
               tively and automatically assess building models will make the enforcement of new
               regulations more practical. Some building codes already require that energy
               analyses be performed on all buildings, to comply with standards for energy con-
               sumption. The use of performance-based standards, as opposed to prescriptive
               standards, is likely to increase. The first energy calculation tools integrated within
               BIM tools are already available, which means that BIM will facilitate the push for
               sustainable buildings.

               8.4.7 Impact on Project Documentation:
                     On-Demand Drawings
               The importance of drawings is expected to decline as BIM becomes ubiquitous
               on construction sites, but drawings are unlikely to disappear until digital display
               technologies are flexible and hardy enough for everyday use onsite (this is dis-
               cussed in the medium-term forecast below). One function of drawings in today’s
               construction industry is for documentation of business transactions in the form
               of appendices to construction contracts. Already, however, there are indications
               that BIM models can better serve this purpose, partly because of their improved
               accessibility to non-professionals.
                   Because drawings can be produced on-demand from the model using cus-
               tomized formats, the development of better onsite documentation for crews
               and installers will lead to new capabilities. Isometric views with sequential




c08.indd 301                                                                                                              12/19/07 2:06:51 PM
          302 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 assembly views and bills of material will facilitate crew operations. An early
                                 example is presented in Figure 5-12.
                                      A technical and legal hurdle that must be resolved is the notion of signing a
                                 digital model, or even its individual components. Another is the issue of whether
                                 access to models in the future, as applications develop and old versions are no
                                 longer supported, will remain reliable. Both of these issues have been resolved
                                 in other business fields, and the economic drivers are strong enough to ensure
                                 that they will be resolved for building information models too. Solutions may
                                 take advantage of advanced encryption technologies, third-party archiving of
                                 original model files, neutral view-only formats, and other techniques. In practice,
                                 a growing number of project participants already choose to build according to
                                 models, rather than drawings. Legal practice will have to keep pace with com-
                                 mercial practice.

                                 8.4.8 Impact on BIM Tools: More Integration, More
                                       Specialization, More Information
                                 Building information model generation tools still contain broad room for
                                 improvement and enhancement, in terms of the breadth of their coverage of the
                                 building construction domain. They can also expand on the types of parametric
                                 relationships and constraints they support. These tools will incorporate increas-
                                 ingly comprehensive families of building parts and products.
                                      The ready availability of BIM platforms will encourage a new wave of plug-
                                 ins that will emerge over the next five years. Several areas of new product devel-
                                 opment are likely. One may be the emergence of better tools for architectural
                                 conceptual design, integrating aspects of DProfiler (Beck Technology 2007),
                                 Trelligence Affinity (Trelligence 2007), and Ecotect (Ecotect 2007), as discussed
                                 in Chapter 5. Another likely area will be layout and fabrication tools for new
                                 materials and building surfaces. Yet others might include new support software
                                 for store layout, fixturing, interior office layout, and detailing by the many design-
                                 related trades that serve building owners or lessees, etc.
                                      Increased integration of analysis interfaces within design modeling
                                 software is technically feasible and desirable. Competition between vendors of
                                 leading BIM authoring tools interested in providing comprehensive suites of
                                 software products is already evident, because the issue of interoperability
                                 remains insufficiently resolved. Vendors can build BIM software suites either
                                 by buying up analysis software providers or by forming alliances that enable an
                                 analysis pre-processor to run directly from their interfaces. The trend began
                                 with embedded structural analysis software and is likely to continue with energy
                                 and acoustic analyses, estimating, code checking, and planning compliance.
                                      Because of the large and growing size of BIM project files and the difficul-
                                 ties inherent in managing model exchanges, there will be a growing demand




c08.indd 302                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:06:52 PM
                                                                                                      8.4 Vision 2012   303

               for BIM servers with the potential for managing projects at the object level,
               rather than at the file level. These may be offered by a variety of companies,
               including BIM authoring software companies, existing project collaboration
               Web service-providers, and new startups. The technology for such exchanges
               already exists within BIM systems that enable multiple users to access the
               model simultaneously, by locking individual objects; it is necessary to port that
               capability to a larger and more functionally complete database environment.
               Given that transactions are primarily incremental updates of objects and their
               parameters (as opposed to complete model exchanges), the actual amount of
               data that needs to be transferred is fairly small, certainly much smaller than
               equivalent sets of CAD files.
                     Model viewer software such as DWF viewers, Tekla’s and Bentley’s Web
               viewers, 3D PDF, and others are becoming important tools, due to their simplic-
               ity. They are likely to begin offering more extensive information than just graphics
               and basic object IDs and properties. A wide variety of applications—including
               quantity takeoffs, basic clash checking, and even procurement planning—can be
               used as information consumers only; they do not need to update information to
               BIM models. As such, they may be able to run directly from DWF-style files.
               These simplified file formats may be exploited by a variety of output only third
               party plug-ins for use with Web interfaces.
                     New tools for locating and inserting building product and assembly models,
               called building element models (BEMs) (Arnold 2007), are under rapid develop-
               ment. Two development issues are semantic searching and compatibility of BEMs
               to multiple BIM platforms. Today, we are already able to search the Web and find
               building products based on user defined criteria, if one knows product names and/
               or standard material names. Semantic searching will enable searches that accept a
               broad range of synonyms, with methods that understand class and inheritance rela-
               tions and can deal with combinations of attributes. The underlying problems of
               semantic representation can be found in all industries. Since these challenges cross
               industries, an unprecedented amount of money is being invested in semantic search
               technology (Bader et al. 2003). AEC practitioners should look forward to tools
               that leverage BIM semantics to organize content in several ways and provide users
               with the ability to develop customized semantic searches. For example:

                   • Find an automatically controlled louver window shading system that can
                     span between six-foot–on-center mullions;
                   • Find all products that are applied in a particular context across multiple
                     projects.

                   These capabilities will gradually become available. More powerful search
               and selection capabilities are likely to become the market distinguishers for




c08.indd 303                                                                                                            12/19/07 2:06:52 PM
          304 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 different commercial e-business Web sites. The introduction of these capabili-
                                 ties will begin by 2012, but full capabilities will not yet be realized.
                                      As noted in Chapter 2, building model authoring tools currently incorpo-
                                 rate a variety of parametric modeling capabilities. As a result, an object with
                                 parametric rules developed for one system cannot be translated and imported
                                 into another without losing parametric behavior. This restricts the development
                                 of effective BEMs for use in different BIM tools. These restrictions will whittle
                                 away as more complex translation capabilities are developed incrementally.
                                 BEMs that rely on fixed shape geometries, such as bathroom fixture and door
                                 hardware, are already available, as described in Chapter 5. Future extensions
                                 will support parametrically varying alternative shapes, such as:

                                     • Assemblies with varying layouts and shape-based on context, such as
                                       structural waffle slabs or acoustic ceiling systems;
                                     • Topologically varying shapes, such as stairways and railings.

                                      Eventually, automatic embedding of 3D details, such as for exterior walls,
                                 roofing systems, etc. will be provided.
                                      With increasing amounts of information available electronically and as
                                 building information models incorporate more process annotations, information
                                 visualization will become central to the overall work process. Multi-display envi-
                                 ronments or interaction information workspaces (Liston et al. 2000; Liston et al.
                                 2001) will become common in the office and onsite. Many of the case studies in
                                 Chapter 9 show examples of the changing office environment with SmartBoards
                                 and large displays. New environments, such as the iRoom shown in Figure 8-4,
                                 enable project teams to interact with the building information model and the
                                 entire information space. Team members can simultaneously view the model,
                                 the schedule, specifications, tasks, and relationships between these views.




                                 FIGURE 8-4 Sample of a multi-display workspace with related views of the project model.
                                 (left screen) A 4D view of the project; (middle screen) The schedule; and (right screen) Component
                                 property list and specification information. Image provided courtesy of CIFE, Stanford University.




c08.indd 304                                                                                                                    12/19/07 2:06:53 PM
                                                                                                    8.4 Vision 2012   305

               8.4.9 Impact on Research: Model Analysis, Simulation,
                     and Work Processes
               The trends described in section 8.1 were loosely grouped in the areas of process
               and technology. The need for research relates to both design and construction
               processes and to the interdependent technologies that BIM depends on. New
               technology leads to process changes; and process change gives rise to new tools.
                    BIM and the Internet level the playing field in terms of access to building
               information at both the project and industry-wide levels. Information flow
               becomes near instantaneous, and collaboration among all concerned within a
               project can become synchronous, which is a paradigm change from traditional
               asynchronous workflows. Traditional workflows with sequential generation,
               submittal, and reviews of drawings—which can be iterative and wasteful due
               to rework—are no longer appropriate. The professional and legal constructs
               that have evolved in relation to these workflows are equally unsuitable for col-
               laborative design and construction processes, with shortened cycle times and
               closely integrated information flows.
                    While academic research has a role to play in defining new concepts and
               measures of information flow that promote integrity and value, it is likely that
               trial-and-error efforts by industry pioneers—driven by practical imperatives—
               will be the primary source of new BIM workflows. New contractual forms, job
               descriptions, commercial alignments, and procurement arrangements will need
               to be synthesized, tested, and refined. Such efforts will support and stimulate
               the development of new tools in both academia and industry. Some of the
               directions for the latter are outlined below.
                    Maintaining integrity across different design models (e.g., architectural vs.
               structural vs. construction) will be imperative, as changes are made to the dif-
               ferent models by their respective disciplines. Unfortunately, in the short term,
               interoperability tools like the IFCs will not support coordination beyond visual
               inspection and the identification of physical clashes in geometry. Managing
               changes across different systems—involving loads (structural or thermal) or
               other performance relations—will be an important and limiting problem. One
               approach to resolve this relies on artificially intelligent agents capable of per-
               forming comparisons between different models, including across disciplines.
               These expert system agents would need to track changes within models and
               then identify logical changes made to one model that ought to be propagated to
               other models, with or without negotiation between designers. Research will
               need to determine the nature of the relationships between building objects that
               are implemented in different discipline-specific systems.
                    The need to develop production building code checkers and other types of
               customizable design review tools will lead to the recognition that hard-coding




c08.indd 305                                                                                                          12/19/07 2:06:55 PM
          306 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 such rules is not the best way to define and implement them. As with other
                                 software applications, hard-coding generates tools that are too expensive to
                                 write and debug and are inflexible for making changes. Instead, high-level and
                                 special purpose rule definition languages will emerge, facilitating the general
                                 development of rule-checking in buildings. At first, they may deal with simpler
                                 application areas, such as circulation assessment. Subsequently, enhancements
                                 will allow for interior room layout and assessment and finally for construction
                                 assembly and detailing. These languages will allow non-programmers to write
                                 and edit checking-rules in a more direct manner. Two types of back-end tools
                                 may be implemented to interpret and run the same languages: (1) for imple-
                                 mentation as a stand-alone checker, possibly on a Web server; and (2) embed-
                                 ded directly into a BIM design tool, allowing checking while designing.
                                      The development of these languages would facilitate the implementation
                                 of design assessment tools in a wide variety of areas, for different building
                                 types, a range of clients, and for building code agencies.
                                      Research is needed to address the various types of model geometry needed
                                 for different types of analyses. While most people are familiar with the need for
                                 stick models for structural analysis, few are aware of the need for tessellation
                                 structures of single bounded surfaces to represent separately managed energy
                                 zones within a building. Automatic methods for tessellation are needed for
                                 pre-processing models for energy analysis. Another type of geometric abstrac-
                                 tion will be necessary for enclosing spatial volumes for computational fluid
                                 dynamics. Such models use heuristics to determine which geometric features
                                 are required for capturing essential air flows. Further development of auto-
                                 mated geometry abstractions is needed if these analyses are to move into
                                 everyday use.
                                      Research on the integration of multiple types of analysis will need signifi-
                                 cant improvement. For example, to show the interaction of heat flows with
                                 natural convection, the output from a simulation of energy radiation to inter-
                                 nal materials within a space will be used as input for a computational fluid
                                 dynamics CFD model. Multi-criteria optimization methods are available, such
                                 as genetic algorithms of various kinds, but utility functions that can express
                                 the integrated performance of buildings with respect to different functions will
                                 be needed. Developing these relationships would allow parametric models to
                                 automatically vary to search for performance objectives dealing with weight,
                                 solar gain, energy use, and other objectives. This would enable new levels of
                                 comprehensive performance-based design that are not possible today.
                                      In the same way that semiconductor fabrication plants undertake for-hire chip
                                 fabrication, prefabrication plants for construction may support custom numerical
                                 control (CNC) fabrication with little or no manual input for precast concrete, steel
                                 welded systems, and a few types of exterior carbon fiber reinforced plastics.




c08.indd 306                                                                                                      12/19/07 2:06:56 PM
                                                                                                     8.4 Vision 2012   307

               Fabrication plants will rely on model data provided by the designers to generate
               CNC instructions, needing only minimal checking by the component producer.
               This will reduce the costs associated with custom fabrication, bringing them closer
               to that of standard construction and spreading their capital investments over many
               projects. A variety of research will become the basis for this capability:

                   • CNC fabrication languages and new automated production methods
                   • Checking and verification languages to allow for the validation of candi-
                     date design instruction
                   • Increased levels of production automation in fabrication technology.
                     CNC machines will need to be adapted from current machine tools and
                     integrated with material handlers and automated assemblers.

                    Another area of research that is already of interest addresses the question
               of how to determine the best methods for delivering model data directly to the
               work face at construction sites. This research concerns hardware, software,
               database architectures, and human-machine interfaces. Although PDAs, tablet
               PCs, and mobile phones are all widely available and will become increasingly
               useful for presenting BIM information onsite, paper documents are still the
               most common technology in use today.
                    Lastly, throughout the period during which basic BIM research and devel-
               opment was pursued, the research community generated many conceptual
               applications for building models that could not be implemented in practice,
               because the BIM tools were not mature enough or in widespread use. Exam-
               ples include: automated control of construction equipment, such as cranes,
               robotic pavers, and concrete surface finishers; automated data collection for
               performance monitoring; construction safety planning; electronic procurement
               and logistics; and many others. While there are still hurdles to overcome—for
               example, how standardized building products and services can be modeled
               for use in multiple BIM environments and comprehensive modeling capabili-
               ties for cast-in-place reinforced concrete—implementation of some of these
               applications may become commercially viable once building information mod-
               els for construction management are more common.


               8.4.10 Vision 2012: The Limitations
               Given the relative inertia of the construction industry and its fragmented struc-
               ture (Chapter 1) BIM adoption will not be complete by the end of this timeframe.
               Paper drawings—or at least 2D drawing formats which can be communicated
               electronically—will remain common forms of construction documentation.
               Only minor shifts can be expected in the costs of construction during this




c08.indd 307                                                                                                           12/19/07 2:06:56 PM
          308 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 period. Indeed, full adoption of BIM in any firm requires two to three years to
                                 become effective. Thus, it is unlikely that significant industry-wide productivity
                                 gains will be observed by 2012. Local effects may be dramatic; building forms
                                 once considered impractical—due to either technical or budget constraints—
                                 will become common. Successful early adapters in both design and construc-
                                 tion will profit from their foresight until the rest of the industry catches up.



                                      8.5 DRIVERS OF CHANGE AND BIM
                                          IMPACTS UP TO 2020

                                 In looking beyond the five year horizon, we start by identifying both the drivers
                                 for change that are likely to motivate people and organizations involved in
                                 building construction and the obstacles they are likely to face. With these
                                 in mind, we have tried to assess developments in the areas of BIM technology,
                                 the ways in which building information is delivered, design services, building
                                 product specifications, code-checking, construction management practice,
                                 employment, professional roles, and the integration of building information
                                 into business systems.

                                 8.5.1 Economic, Technological, and Societal Drivers
                                 There are a number of economic, technological, and societal factors that are likely
                                 to drive the future development of BIM tools and workflows. These will include:
                                 globalization, specialization, and the commoditization of engineering and archi-
                                 tectural services; the move to lean construction methods, the increasing use of
                                 design-build and fast track projects; and the demand for facility management
                                 information.
                                     Globalization resulted from the elimination of barriers to international
                                 trade. In construction, the possibility of moving the production of building
                                 parts to more cost-effective locations will increase demand for highly accurate
                                 and reliable design information, so that pieces can be shipped great distances
                                 with a high degree of confidence that whey will fit correctly when installed.
                                     Specialization and commoditization of design services is another economic
                                 driver that will favor BIM. As niche skills, such as producing renderings or
                                 performing sets of structural analyses, are better developed and defined—and
                                 long-distance collaboration more accepted—BIM will enable the delivery of
                                 special services.
                                     Design-build and fast-track construction projects demand close collabora-
                                 tion between the design and construction functions. Such collaborations will
                                 drive the adoption and development of BIM. Finally, the commercial interests




c08.indd 308                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:06:57 PM
                                                                  8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020   309

               of software vendors and competition between them are fundamental drivers
               that will compel the enhancement and development of BIM systems.
                     Perhaps the most important economic driver for BIM systems and their
               adoption will be the intrinsic value that their quality of information will provide
               to building clients. Improved information quality, building products, visualiza-
               tion tools, cost estimates, and analyses will lead to better decision-making
               during design. The value of building models for maintenance and operations is
               all likely to initiate a snowball effect, where clients demand the use of BIM on
               their projects. (This is already happening at the GSA).
                     Technical progress in computing power, remote sensing technologies,
               computer-controlled production machinery, distributed computing, information
               exchange technologies, and other technologies will open new possibilities that
               software vendors will exploit to their own competitive advantage. Another
               technical area that may introduce further developments that influence BIM
               systems is euphemistically referred to as artificial intelligence. BIM tools are
               convenient platforms for a renaissance of expert system developments for a
               range of purposes, such as code checking, quality reviews, intelligent tools for
               comparing versions, etc. design guides, and design wizards. Many of these
               efforts are already underway but will take another decade to become standard
               practice. Information standardization is another driver for progress. Consist-
               ent definitions of building types, space types, building elements, and other
               terminology will facilitate e-commerce and increasingly complex and auto-
               mated workflows. It can also drive content creation and aid in the management
               and use of parametric building component libraries, both private and public.
               Ubiquitous access to information, including component libraries, makes the
               use of computable models more attractive for a wide variety of purposes.
                     Among societal and cultural drivers, the demand for sustainable construc-
               tion may be the most significant factor. Architects and engineers will be tasked
               with providing much more energy-efficient buildings that utilize recyclable
               materials, which means that more accurate and extensive analyses will be
               needed. BIM systems will need to support these capabilities.
                     The increasing power of computer and global-positioning system (GPS)
               technology will allow for greater use of building information models in the
               field, which will enable faster and more accurate construction. GPS guidance
               is already an important component of automated earthworks equipment con-
               trol systems; similar developments can be expected in construction.

               8.5.2 Obstacles to Change
               As a counterpoint to the drivers mentioned above, there are numerous obstacles
               to progress that BIM faces. These include: technical barriers, legal and liability




c08.indd 309                                                                                                         12/19/07 2:06:57 PM
          310 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 issues, regulation, inappropriate business models, resistance to changes in employ-
                                 ment patterns, and the need to educate large numbers of professionals.
                                      Construction is a collaborative endeavor, and BIM enables closer collabo-
                                 ration than CAD; however, this will require that workflows and commercial
                                 relationships support an increase in the sharing of both liabilities and rewards.
                                 BIM tools and IFC file formats do not yet adequately address support for the
                                 management and tracking of changes to models; nor are contract terms suffi-
                                 ciently developed to handle these collective responsibilities.
                                      The distinct economic interests of designers and contractors are another
                                 possible barrier. In construction business models, only a small portion of the
                                 economic benefits of BIM can accrue to designers. The major payoffs will go to
                                 contractors and owners. A mechanism does not yet exist for rewarding designers
                                 that provide rich information models. Nonetheless, BIM developers cater spe-
                                 cifically to design professions. Although the development of BIM software is
                                 capital intensive, software vendors will have to assume the commercial risk of
                                 developing sophisticated tools for construction contractors.
                                      The major technical barrier is the need for mature interoperability tools.
                                 While Moore’s Law in practice suggests that hardware will not be a barrier, the
                                 development of standards has been slower than expected; and the lack of effec-
                                 tive interoperability continues to be a serious impediment to collaborative
                                 design.

                                 8.5.3 Development of BIM Tools
                                 What effect will these trends have on the future development of BIM tools?
                                 Apart from improvements to the human-machine interfaces that can be expected
                                 of any software, BIM tools will experience significant enhancements in the
                                 following areas:

                                     • Improved import and export capabilities using protocols like IFCs. The
                                       market will demand this, and software vendors will comply. But given
                                       their commercial interests, they will also pursue a second option:
                                     • Each BIM authoring tool will expand its repertoire of applications, ena-
                                       bling increasingly complex buildings to be designed and built using a
                                       family of related tools built on the same platform without the need for
                                       data translation and exchange.
                                     • ‘Lite’ BIM tools for specific building types, such as single-family resi-
                                       dential housing, have been available for some time. If their data can be
                                       imported to professional BIM tools, they may reach a point where own-
                                       ers are able to virtually ‘build’ their dream buildings or apartments and
                                       then transfer them to professionals for actual design and construction.




c08.indd 310                                                                                                     12/19/07 2:06:57 PM
                                                                 8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020   311

                   • There will be movement away from desktop applications to internet-
                     based interactions that employ BIM and integrate Web-based content,
                     from services to building element models and analysis tools. The Tec-
                     tonic BIM Library Manager and QTO plug-in are early examples of AEC
                     services based on an advanced software architecture that supports this
                     paradigm (Arnold 2007).
                   • BIM tools that support products involving complex layout and detailing
                     are also expected to come to market, in much the same way that HVAC
                     equipment companies developed software in the 1980s for selecting
                     system components (e.g., Carrier, Trane). These specialized tools will
                     experience widespread use, because they can potentially carry special
                     product warrantees that are only honored if the product is detailed using
                     these tools. The degree of success or impact that these applications will
                     have is not yet evident.


               8.5.4 Role of Drawings
               Drawings are fundamentally paper-based in format. Drawing symbols and format-
               ting conventions have evolved primarily because paper is a two-dimensional
               medium; orthographic projections were essential for measuring distances on
               paper. If and when digital displays become sufficiently cheap and flexible to suit
               the conditions of work onsite, paper printouts of drawings will likely disappear.
               Once drawings are no longer printed, there will be no clear reason to maintain
               their formatting conventions. In the face of the superior medium of 3D building
               information models, they may finally disappear altogether.
                    In the design domain, visualization formats will replace drawing types,
               with different formats developed for each of the parties involved: owners, con-
               sultants, bankers and investors, and potential occupants. These formats may
               include standard walkthrough views with audio and tactile feedback added to
               the visual content. User controlled walkthroughs will support further interro-
               gation of the model. For example, a client may want spatial data or a developer
               may want to query rental rates. Integration of these services into the fee struc-
               ture will add value to architectural services.


               8.5.5 Design Professions: Providing New Services
               Increasingly, architects will provide the integration environment needed for
               modern practice. This includes: multi-screen conference rooms, supporting
               parallel projection of physical design, schedules, procurement tracking, and
               other aspects of project planning. Contractors will also provide these services,
               and competition will determine which firms will provide these services in the




c08.indd 311                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:06:58 PM
          312 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 future. In most projects, it is offered by both, first with the architect in the lead
                                 for design coordination and then moving to the contractors for coordinating
                                 construction.
                                     Most projects will be managed in a federated manner on BIM servers, with
                                 separate models dealing with the scope of expertise for each profession. Better
                                 coordination tools will be available for maintaining consistency across feder-
                                 ated model sets, but the role of model manager will be as essential as any other
                                 professional service. Models will support a growing number of analyses run on
                                 derived views for energy, structures, acoustics, lighting, environmental impacts,
                                 and fabrication. They will also support a variety of automated checks, by
                                 responding to building codes, material design handbooks, product warrantees,
                                 functional analyses of organizational operations within the structure, and oper-
                                 ations and maintenance procedures.

                                 8.5.6 Integrated Design/Build Services and Agreements
                                 Over the next decade, we expect many innovations in project delivery mecha-
                                 nisms. New forms of contracts will be explored, possibly based on Limited Liability
                                 Corporations (LCCs) or the Australian form of relationship contracting. The bal-
                                 ancing of risk and rewards will become part of the equity relationship with clients,
                                 and plans will explicitly state the distribution of benefits as well as penalties. An
                                 early example of such an effort is the Sutter Health Incentive pooling plan pre-
                                 sented in the Camino Medical Group Building case study in Chapter 9.
                                      Another possible area of innovation is a more explicit definition of work-
                                 flows for supporting project development and completion. An option provided
                                 by the workflow exchanges defined in the National BIM Standard is that they
                                 will be referred to in contracts—describing which information flows will be
                                 used, at what stages of the project, and who they will be exchanged between—
                                 based on a working process agreed to during contract negotiations. This out-
                                 line of the work plan will make the collaboration model explicit and determine
                                 when engineering consultants, fabricators, and others will become involved.
                                 Such an agreement will, in turn, affect staffing requirements for each party for
                                 the project’s duration and provide a workflow of the project that can be tracked
                                 and eventually supported by additional automation.

                                 8.5.7 Building Product Manufacturers:
                                       Intelligent Product Specs
                                 As BIM becomes ubiquitous, designers will prefer to specify building products
                                 that offer information to be inserted directly into a model in electronic form,
                                 including hyperlinked references to the suppliers’ catalogs, price lists, etc.
                                 Rudimentary electronic building product catalogs available today will evolve




c08.indd 312                                                                                                       12/19/07 2:06:58 PM
                                                                 8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020   313

               into sophisticated and intelligent product specs, including information that
               enables structural, thermal, lighting, LEED compliance, and other analyses, in
               addition to the data now used for specifying and procuring products.
                     The basic challenges for realizing high levels of semantic search will have
               been addressed, and new capabilities that allow for searches based on color,
               textures, and shape will become available. The import and exchange of paramet-
               ric objects will have become an old issue, with only fine-grained enhancements
               still being explored.

               8.5.8 Construction Regulation: Automated Code-Checking
               Checking building design models for compliance with code requirements and
               planning restrictions is an area that will be developed further over the next ten
               years. This functionality could be provided in one of two ways:

                   • Application service providers sell/lease code-checking software plug-ins
                     embedded in BIM software tools. The plug-in extracts local requirement
                     data from online databases maintained by the service provider, as a serv-
                     ice to local jurisdictions. Designers check their designs continuously as
                     they evolve.
                   • External software directly checks a neutral model file, such as an IFC
                     file, for code compliance. The designer exports the model and the check
                     is run on the IFC model.

                    Both developments are possible, although the former has an advantage for
               users; providing feedback directly to the model will make fixing problems eas-
               ier than receiving an external report that needs interpretation before edits can
               be made. Because design is an iterative process—and designers will want to
               obtain feedback, make changes, and check again—it may be preferred.
                    The latter case will be required to guarantee final compliance with the
               code. With the proper XML link, external software can also provide input for
               the source BIM tool. In both cases, the files containing encoded planning and
               code requirement rules should be small and generalized format files that are
               easily maintained.

               8.5.9 Lean Construction and BIM
               Lean construction (Koskela 1992; LCI 2004) and BIM are likely to progress
               hand-in-hand, because they are complementary in several important ways.
               When applied to building design, lean thinking implies: reduced waste through
               the elimination of unnecessary process stages that provide no direct value
               to the client, such as with producing drawings; concurrent design to eliminate




c08.indd 313                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:06:58 PM
          314 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 errors and rework, as far as possible; and shortened cycle durations. BIM
                                 enables all of these goals.
                                      The need to efficiently produce highly customized products for discerning
                                 consumers is a key driver of lean production (Womack and Jones 2003). An
                                 essential component is the reduction of cycle-times for individual products,
                                 because it helps designers and producers better respond to clients’ (often
                                 changing) needs. BIM technology can play a crucial role in reducing the dura-
                                 tion of both design and construction, but its main impact is felt when the
                                 design phase duration is efficiently collapsed. Rapid development of concep-
                                 tual designs, strong communication with clients through visualization and cost
                                 estimates, concurrent design development and coordination with engineering
                                 consultants, error-reduction and automation in producing documentation, and
                                 facilitated prefabrication all contribute to this effect. Thus, BIM will become
                                 an indispensable tool for construction, not only because of its direct benefits
                                 but because it enables lean design and construction.

                                 8.5.10 Construction Companies: Information Integration
                                 The next step for construction will be the integration of specialized enterprise
                                 resource planning (ERP) software with construction building information
                                 models. Models will become the core information source for quantities of work
                                 and materials, construction methods, and resource utilization. They will play a
                                 pivotal role in enabling the collection of automated data for construction con-
                                 trol. Early versions of these integrated systems will appear before 2012 in the
                                 form of plug-in software added to architectural oriented BIM authoring tools.
                                 Applications for construction management that are added in this way are liable
                                 to be limited in functionality, due to the fundamental differences between object
                                 classes, relationships, and aggregations needed for design and construction.
                                      Only later will fully purpose-built applications mature. They may be devel-
                                 oped in a combination of three ways:

                                     • Vendors of production detailing systems will add objects to model work
                                       packages and resources, with built-in parametric functions for rapid
                                       detailing according to company practices. Built into these systems will be
                                       applications for construction planning (scheduling, estimating, budgeting
                                       and procurement) and construction management (purchasing, production
                                       planning and control, quality control). The result will be highly detailed
                                       models for construction management. Multiple projects will be managed
                                       in company-wide setups with multiple models.
                                     • As extensions to standard ERP systems, with specific ‘live’ links added
                                       to BIM models. These applications will have transparent interfaces to
                                       BIM tools but remain external to them.




c08.indd 314                                                                                                   12/19/07 2:06:59 PM
                                                                 8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020   315

                   • As entirely new ERP applications built for construction, with tightly
                     integrated construction-specific building model functionality as well as
                     business and production management functions, such as accounting,
                     billing, and order tracking.

                    Regardless of the route taken, far more sophisticated tools for construction
               management—capable of integrating functions across a company’s separate
               projects—will result. The ability to balance labor and equipment assignments
               across multiple projects and coordinate small-batch deliveries are examples of
               the kinds of benefits that may be achieved.
                    Once building information models integrated with ERP systems are com-
               monplace, the use of automated data collection technologies, such as LADAR
               (laser scanning), GPS positioning, and RFID tags, will also become common,
               both for construction and work monitoring and logistics. These tools will
               replace existing measuring methods for layout of large-scale buildings; build-
               ing to the model will become standard practice.
                    Globalization trends along with BIM-enabled integration of highly-developed
               design and commercial information—facilitating prefabrication and pre-
               assembly—will cause the building construction industry to be closer aligned with
               other manufacturing industries, with a minimum of activity performed onsite.
               This does not imply mass production but lean production of highly customized
               products. Each building will continue to have unique design features, but BIM
               will enable their prefabrication in ways that ensure compatibility when all parts
               are delivered. As a result, foundations may become the major component of
               work still performed onsite.


               8.5.11 BIM Skills and Employment: New Roles
               Because BIM is a revolutionary shift away from drawing production, the set of
               skills needed is quite different. Whereas drafting demands familiarity with the
               language and symbols of architectural and construction drawings, BIM
               demands a very good understanding of the way buildings come together. Draft-
               ing is the laborious act of expressing ideas on two-dimensional media, whether
               paper or screen; modeling is akin to actually building the building. Therefore,
               it makes sense for skilled architects and engineers to model directly, rather
               than instruct others to do it for them only as a matter of record. When BIM is
               managed as if it is simply a more sophisticated version of CAD, its power to
               enable rapid exploration and evaluation of design alternatives is overlooked.
                    Early experience in teaching BIM to undergraduate civil engineering
               students has demonstrated that it is much easier to learn BIM compared to
               learning the combined skills of preparing orthographic engineering drawings
               and operating CAD tools. BIM appears fairly intuitive to students, and it more




c08.indd 315                                                                                                        12/19/07 2:06:59 PM
          316 Chapter 8 The Future: Building with BIM

                                 closely resembles their perception of the world. If undergraduate engineering
                                 and architectural schools begin teaching BIM skills within the first years of
                                 professional training, it will only be a matter of time before design profession-
                                 als are able to create and manage their own BIM models. If such education
                                 were to begin today—as it has in some schools—it would take five to ten years
                                 for BIM savvy professionals to become commonplace in design offices and
                                 construction companies.
                                      Until that happens, the ranks of BIM operators will likely be drawn from
                                 drafters, detailers, and designers able to make the conceptual transition. Junior
                                 staff members are more likely to transition successfully, so most design firms
                                 will maintain the split between designers and documenters. Only when design-
                                 ers manipulate models directly, however, will the traditional split be blurred.
                                 As with most sophisticated new technologies, those skilled in their use during
                                 early adoption will benefit from the imbalance of supply and demand, and they
                                 will command premium salaries. This effect will mitigate over time, although
                                 in the long term, greater productivity through BIM will cause the average wage
                                 of building design personnel to rise.
                                      Naturally, as the years pass, interfaces will become more intuitive, and
                                 professional users who have grown up with SimCity® and other gaming environ-
                                 ments will be better equipped to operate BIM systems. At that point, designers
                                 modeling directly will become prevalent.
                                      While these roles are directly centered on current BIM tools, the workbench
                                 environment enabled by integrating sustainability, cost estimation, fabrication,
                                 and other technologies with BIM tools will lead to new kinds of specialized roles.
                                 Already, energy-related design issues are commonly dealt with by specialists
                                 within a design team. Value engineering with new materials is another example.
                                 In these cases, we will see many new roles emerge in both design and fabrica-
                                 tion. They will address the growing diversity of specialized issues that a generalist
                                 designer or contractor cannot address, and this will lead to further subcontract-
                                 ing of both design and fabrication services.




c08.indd 316                                                                                                       12/19/07 2:07:00 PM
                                                        8.5 Drivers of Change and BIM Impacts up to 2020   317


               Chapter 8 Discussion Questions
                      1. What kinds of new architectural and construction services
                         will the use of BIM enable?
                      2. How might the roles of architects, engineers, and
                         contractors change as a result of BIM? What new
                         educational requirements are needed for employees of
                         architectural, engineering, and construction contracting
                         firms to allow better utilization of BIM and support for the
                         new roles?
                      3. How will building owners benefit from the use of BIM
                         before and after the construction of a building?
                      4. What effect might BIM have on the potential for
                         globalization of design and construction?
                      5. How can BIM facilitate lean design and construction
                         practices? In your answer, cite possible effects of BIM
                         on rework in design, cycle time, and levels of work-in-
                         progress fabrication and construction.
                      6. How can building product manufacturers take advan-
                         tage of BIM in the marketing and procurement of their
                         products? What technological developments are needed
                         in BIM and other support systems?
                      7. In your view, what are the three most important areas
                         that require research and development to further advance
                         the use of BIM technology? These may be technological,
                         organizational, or practice oriented.




c08.indd 317                                                                                               12/19/07 2:07:00 PM
               CHAPTER                       9
               BIM Case Studies



                      9.0 INTRODUCTION TO BIM CASE STUDIES

                 n this chapter we present ten case studies of projects in which BIM played a
               I significant role. They represent the experiences of owners, architects, engi-
               neers, contractors, fabricators, and even construction crews—all pioneers in
               the application of BIM. The case studies listed in Table 9-1 represent a broad
               range of buildings for different functions including manufacturing, govern-
               ment facilities, justice, medical, sports, residential, offices, parking, retail, and
               commerce. The largest building is over 1.5 million square feet; the smallest is
               a 32,000 square foot curtain wall facade.
                    Taken as a whole, the case studies cover the use of BIM across all phases of
               the facility delivery process (as shown in Figure 9-1) by a wide range of partici-
               pants (see Table 9-2). Each demonstrates a diverse set of benefits to various organ-
               izations, resulting from the implementation of BIM tools and processes. Table 9-3
               indexes the case studies according to the benefits listed in Section 1.5 of Chapter 1.
               The wide variety of software used is shown in Table 9-4.
                    No single project has yet realized all or even a majority of BIM’s potential ben-
               efits, and it is doubtful that all of the benefits that the technology enables have been
               discovered or even identified. Each case study presents the salient aspects of the
               BIM process and focuses on the ways each team used the available tools to maxi-
               mum benefit. We also highlight the many lessons that these teams learned as they
               encountered challenges in implementing the new technologies and processes.
                    Many of the projects were in progress at the time of writing, preventing a
               full review or complete assessment of the benefits. Naturally, research was

               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   319



c09.indd 319                                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:43:46 AM
          320 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                    Table 9-1   The location of case study projects.
                                     No.                      Project                              Location

                                      1           General Motors Production Plant       Flint, Michigan, US

                                      2           Coast Guard Facility Planning         Multiple locations

                                      3           Camino Group Medical Building         Mountain View, California, US

                                      4           National Aquatics Center              Beijing, China

                                      5           Federal Office Building               San Francisco, California, US

                                      6           100 11th Avenue Apartments            New York City, NY, US

                                      7           One Island East Office Tower          Hong Kong, China

                                      8           Penn National Parking Structure       Grantville, PA, US

                                      9           Hillwood Commercial Project           Dallas, TX, US

                                     10           Federal Courthouse                    Jackson Mississippi, US


          FIGURE 9-1
          Case study guide
          showing various project
          phases.




                                    limited to the availability of various participants and their willingness to
                                    disclose information. Architecture, engineering, construction, fabrication, and
                                    real estate development are competitive fields, and organizations are often
                                    reluctant to disclose their enterprise expertise. Nevertheless, most organiza-
                                    tions and individuals were extremely helpful and made significant efforts to
                                    share their stories and provide images, information, and important insights.




c09.indd 320                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:43:48 AM
                                                                                                                                                                    9.0 Introduction to BIM Case Studies                                                                                                        321

               Table 9-2 Participant index for the case studies.
                                                    9.1                9.2                  9.3                            9.4                      9.5                        9.6                      9.7                                  9.8                               9.9                             9.10



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hillwood Commercial
                                                 General Motors     Coast Guard           Camino Group                  Beijing National         San Francisco              100 11th Avenue                                              Penn National                                                         Jackson Federal
                                                                                                                                                                                                       One Island East



                                                 Production Plant   Facility Planning     Medical Building              Aquatics Center          Federal Building           NYC                        Office Tower                      Parking Structure                 Project                             Courthouse
                Participants

                Owner/developer                       •                   •                           •                                                 •                                                       •                                                                 •                                 •

                Architect                             •                   •                                                    •                        •                          •                            •                                                                                                   •

                Engineer                              •                                               •                        •                        •                                                       •                                 •                                                                 •

                Contractor                            •                                               •                        •                        •                                                       •                                                                 •

                Subcontractor/ Fabricator             •                                               •                                                 •                          •                            •                                 •

                Facility Operations/End users         •                   •                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         •




               Table 9-3 Benefit checklist for the case studies. The benefits correspond to the list in Section 1.5,
               Chapter 1.
                                                                          9.1             9.2                        9.3                     9.4                      9.5                      9.6                           9.7                         9.8                                9.9                    9.10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         One Island East Office        Penn National Parking             Hillwood Commercial



                                                                                             Coast Guide Facility
                                                                       General Motors                               Camino Group           Beijing National          SF Federal Office        100 11th Avenue


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jackson Federal
                                                                       Production Plant                             Medical Building       Aquatics Center           Building                 NYC                        Tower                         Structure                         Project
               Project Phase             Benefits

               Feasibility study    Support for project                                         •                                                                                                                                                                                                •
               (Chapter 4)          scoping, cost
                                    estimation

               Concept design       Scenario planning                                           •                                                                                                                                                                                                •
               (Chapters 4
               and 5)               Early and accurate                                                                                          •                                                 •                                                          •
                                    visualizations

                                    Optimize energy                                                                                                                      •
                                    efficiency and
                                    sustainability

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (Continued)




c09.indd 321                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:43:48 AM
          Table 9-3 Continued
                                                         9.1              9.2                      9.3               9.4                9.5                 9.6                9.7               9.8                     9.9                 9.10



                                                                                                                                                                                               Penn National Parking   Hillwood Commercial



                                                                          Coast Guide Facility
                                                       General Motors                            Camino Group       Beijing National   SF Federal Office   100 11th Avenue


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jackson Federal
                                                                                                                                                                             One Island East



                                                       Production Plant                          Medical Building   Aquatics Center    Building            NYC               Office Tower      Structure               Project
           Project Phase             Benefits

           Integrated           Automatic                   •                                        •                   •                 •                   •                 •                   •                                            •
           Design/              maintenance of
           construction         consistency in
           (Chapter 5)          design

                                Enhanced building                                                                        •                 •                                     •                                          •                     •
                                performance and
                                quality

                                Checks against                                                                                             •                                                         •                                            •
                                design intent

                                Accurate and con-           •                                        •                   •                 •                   •                 •                   •                                            •
                                sistent drawing sets

           Construction         Earlier                     •                                        •                   •                 •                   •                                                                                  •
           execution/           collaboration of
           coordination         multiple design
           (Chapters 6 and 7)   disciplines

                                Synchronize design          •                                        •                                                         •                 •                   •
                                and construction
                                planning

                                Discover errors             •                                        •                                     •                                     •                   •
                                before construction
                                (clash detection)

                                Drive fabrication           •                                        •                   •                                     •                                     •
                                and greater use
                                of prefabricated
                                components

                                Support lean con-           •                                        •
                                struction techniques

                                Coordinate/                 •                                        •                   •                                     •
                                synchronize
                                procurement

           Facility operation   Lifecycle benefits                                                                                         •
           (Chapter 4)          regarding
                                operating costs

                                Lifecycle benefits                           •
                                regarding
                                maintenance/




c09.indd 322                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:43:49 AM
                                                                                                                                 9.0 Introduction to BIM Case Studies                                                        323

               Table 9-4 Software checklist for the case studies.
                                                    9.1                9.2                 9.3                9.4                9.5                9.6               9.7               9.8                 9.9              9.10



                                                  General Motors     Coast Guard         Camino Group       Beijing National   SF Federal Office   100 11th Avenue                     Penn National                         Jackson Federal
                                                                                                                                                                     One Island East                       Hillwood Com-


                                                  Production Plant   Facility Planning   Medical Building   Aquatics Center    Building            NYC               Office Tower      Parking Structure   mercial Project   Courthouse
                Application
                Area            Software Tool
                Model Generation Tools
                Architecture   ArchiCAD                                    •

                               Bentley                 •                                                                            •
                               Architecture*

                               Digital Project                                                                                                         •                 •

                               ONUMA Plan-                                 •
                               ning System

                               Revit Building                                                                                                                                                                                   •

                Structural     Bentley                                                                           •
                               Structural*

                               Revit Structures                                               •                                                                                                                                 •

                               SDS/2                   •

                               Tekla Structures                                                                                     •                                                       •

                MEP            CADDuct                                                        •

                               Design Series           •

                               IntelliCAD              •

                               Piping Designer                                                •
                               3D

                               Revit Systems                                                                                                                                                                                    •

                BIM Related Tools
                2D             AutoCAD                 •                                      •                                     •                  •                 •                  •                                   •
                               SprinkCAD                                                      •

                3D             Architectural                                                  •
                               Desktop

                               3D Studio Max                                                                     •

                               FormZ                                                                                                •

                               Rhino                                                                             •                                     •

                Manu-          CATIA                                                                                                                   •
                facturing

                               Solidworks                                                                                                              •

                Database       MySQL                                       •




c09.indd 323                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:43:49 AM
          324 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          Table 9-4 Continued
                                                    9.1                9.2                 9.3                9.4                9.5                9.6               9.7               9.8                 9.9              9.10



                                                  General Motors     Coast Guard         Camino Group       Beijing National   SF Federal Office   100 11th Avenue                     Penn National                         Jackson Federal
                                                                                                                                                                     One Island East                       Hillwood Com-


                                                  Production Plant   Facility Planning   Medical Building   Aquatics Center    Building            NYC               Office Tower      Parking Structure   mercial Project   Courthouse
               Application
               Area             Software Tool

               Analysis Tools

               Structural       RAM                    •

                                Robot                                                                                                                  •

                                STAAD Pro                                                                                                                                                   •

                                Strand                                                                           •                                     •

               Estimating       Dprofiler                                                                                                                                                                      •

                                US Cost                                                                                                                                                                                         •

               Clash            Navisworks             •                                      •                                                                                                                                 •
               detection

               Energy           EnergyPlus                                                                                          •

          *Bentley Architecture and Bentley Structures are based on the Microstation Triforma platform




                                                 Figure 9-1 and Tables 9-2, 9-3, and 9-4 are guides for readers to both
                                             compare the case studies and to quickly find a case study that matches a reader’s
                                             special interest. They provide an index according to the following four
                                             classifications:

                                                 1. Project phase – Figure 9-1.
                                                 2. Participants – Table 9-2.
                                                 3. Benefits experienced – Table 9-3.
                                                 4. BIM and other software tools used – Table 9-4.


                                                  9.1 FLINT GLOBAL V6 ENGINE PLANT EXPANSION
                                                                     BIM to shorten the design-construction cycle using lean
                                                                     construction methods
                                                 General Motors (GM) recently developed and tested innovative design and
                                             construction procedures at two of their automotive plants in Michigan. Driven
                                             by the need to better respond to the ever-changing car market in flexible ways,




c09.indd 324                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:43:50 AM
                                                                         9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion   325

               GM aimed to minimize design and construction time and postpone commitment
               to construction projects until the last minute. Principles from lean construction
               and a thorough integration of BIM technology were the means to achieve these
               goals.
                    Traditionally, the automobile industry has been open to new BIM approaches,
               especially since similar techniques have already proven themselves in manufac-
               turing. Parametric modeling for mechanical parts has already reached a high
               degree of maturity in comparison to parts modeled for buildings. GM has
               aggressively implemented a new delivery system, requiring all participants to
               engage in BIM technology.
                    The client set a very tight schedule for the completion of the new Flint
               project. Consequently, they sought a company with sufficient experience in the
               design of automotive manufacturing plants and the use of BIM technology. To
               stay within the limited available time frame, the project team adopted the
               Design-Build (DB) approach, as it has proven effective at reducing project
               durations. The project team was formed around the goal of employing BIM
               throughout the project’s life-cycle. Based on that commitment, modeling capa-
               bilities became the primary criteria for the procurement of services. Ghafari
               Associates LLC was selected to take the Architecture-Engineer (AE) role in the
               DB team.
                    Ghafari Associates and GM had previously collaborated on several projects.
               The most prominent project was a new plant in Lansing Delta Township
               (LDT). GM’s LDT assembly complex was built with the shortest construction
               time to date, which was 20% faster than the five-year-old Lansing Grand River
               facility. Innovation doesn’t always come easy, but the steep learning curve of
               the LDT project and the determination of the team members culminated in a
               picture-book second project in Flint. Although Flint is receiving the credit in
               this case-study, it was due to the procedures developed at LDT and the experi-
               ence gathered in the process that enabled the Flint Plant’s success. For the LDT
               project, GM insisted on 2D paper-based delivery, which resulted in considera-
               bly more time and effort being spent interfacing between the 2D plans and the
               3D model.
                    Important lessons were learned from the LDT project. In order to gain
               further benefits from BIM, GM and Ghafari established the following
               objectives:

                   • All project team members must be committed to using digital models to
                     optimize the benefits of the BIM approach. The efficiencies associated
                     with improved interfaces between partners or processes occur only if all
                     project participants use BIM tools.




c09.indd 325                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:43:50 AM
          326 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                   • Subcontractors for all trades need to continuously provide input to the 3D
                                     model and refine their 3D models, from fabrication to field installation.
                                   • Where necessary, Ghafari would need to act as a consultant to the less
                                     experienced firms in order to facilitate production of 3D models by all
                                     specialty trades.

                                   Many of the aspects that enabled the engine plant extension were not based
                               on new technologies. Ghafari’s advanced technology manager, Samir Emdanat,
                               observed that the primary technological aspects were just as achievable two
                               years earlier. The greater difficulty was in distributing the building model and
                               conveying the know-how for manipulating it to all members of the project
                               team. At the start of the project, GM waived the requirement to use a single
                               platform and allowed the team to choose best-in-class software for each of the
                               design, detailing, and fabrication tasks.


                               9.1.1 The Project
                               The existing 760,000 sf Flint Engine South Plant was delivered in 2000. The
                               442,000 sq. ft. plant extension, reported here, was constructed in 2005 and
                               began production in September 2006.
                                   The design of an automotive plant is focused on meeting functional
                               requirements centered on the manufacturing process, versus aesthetic ones.
                               Automotive facilities have intricate infrastructures comprising not only HVAC
                               ducts, electrical installations, and piping but also assembly lines for the
                               manufacturing process.
                                   General Motors was especially serious about restricting construction time
                               while streamlining the budget and maintaining quality. The additional manu-
                               facturing facility had to be designed and delivered under a fast-track schedule
                               of just 40 weeks. A conventional DB project would have taken 60 weeks
                               or more, and a Design-Bid-Build (DBB) approach would have taken considerably
                               more than 60 weeks.
                                   It was also clear to the entire team that these requirements could not be
                               met with a conventional serial 2D paper-based workflow. It would be neces-
                               sary to compress the timeline of the critical path. This could only be done by
                               running design, engineering, and construction activities in parallel. This
                               resulted in modifications to the serial exchange of building models, with fre-
                               quent and concurrent exchanges of the building model to keep all teams up-to-
                               date. The success of this approach becomes clear, considering that the project
                               was delivered within 35 weeks, a 12.5% time saving on an already stringent
                               schedule. Various timelines are shown in Figure 9-1-1.




c09.indd 326                                                                                                1/16/08 11:43:51 AM
                                                                         9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion   327

                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-1-1
                                                                                                      Conventional Design-
                                                                                                      Bid-Build (80+ weeks;
                                                                                                      60 weeks if fast-
                                                                                                      tracked); Conventional
                                                                                                      Design-Build
                                                                                                      (60 weeks).




               9.1.2 The Project Team
               Ghafari
               Since Yousif B. Ghafari founded the company in 1982, their success has been
               closely linked to effectively adopting CAD technology in an engineering and
               multi-disciplinary practice. Continuing this tradition, the firm has taken a lead-
               ing role as practitioners of BIM technology. A high proportion of Ghafari’s
               customers are from the automotive sector, where the benefits of 3D are well
               known. Additionally, Ghafari has developed into a firm in which technological
               support for cross-disciplinary communication is sought after and integrated
               into all business processes.
                    Ghafari created the Advanced Technology Group as an independent unit
               within the firm that is responsible for researching and defining best practice
               solutions for BIM workflows. One of their main guidelines is not the use of
               BIM simply for technology’s sake but to assess which solutions are practical for
               each individual project. The case is especially convincing when BIM can be
               carried through to the construction phase. Emphasis is given to integrating
               partner firms, since many of the advantages are not achievable if only a subset
               of the involved parties is using BIM.
                    Over the years, Ghafari developed special know-how in 3D and 4D mode-
               ling, digital document exchange, and interference control. Prominent strate-
               gies include the frequent exchange of documents within the company and
               among subcontractors and the desire to reduce requests for information (RFI)
               and field changes. Streamlining these processes has resulted in improved
               time and cost efficiency and ultimately lower bids. Since multiple platforms
               and software packages are used throughout the company, interoperability is an
               important feature. Thus, Ghafari is a proactive supporter of open standards.




c09.indd 327                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:43:51 AM
          328 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                          Contractors
                                          The lead contractor for the Flint V6 Plant Extension, the Ideal Group, consists
                                          of six member companies. The group had previously worked with General
                                          Motors on several construction projects. While they have not always been
                                          active in applying BIM, the companies were willing to extend their know-how
                                          in this direction. No BIM project management tools were used by the Ideal
                                          Group. They were primarily responsible for holding trade contracts and
                                          processing payment requests.
                                               Ghafari and the lead contractor, the Ideal Group, started the design proc-
                                          ess immediately, in order to establish the required documents needed to prepare
                                          a GMP (Guaranteed Maximum Price) contract within a few weeks. The DB
                                          team then initiated the procurement process for the subcontractor services
                                          while taking benefit of the input provided by GM. The ability and willingness
                                          to exploit the BIM approach to the fullest extent was an important element in
                                          selecting the subcontractors. The project team, including Ghafari, the Ideal
                                          Group, and the major subcontractors was set at the outset of the project. Most


          Table 9-1-1          Factual data for the Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion Project.
               Hard Facts

               Project                      Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion

               Location                     Flint MI, USA

               Client                       General Motors Corp.

               AE                           Ghafari Associates, LLC

               Contract Type                Design-Build

               General Contractor           The Ideal Group, Inc. (Construction)

               Contractors                  Dee Cramer, Inc. (HVAC)
                                            John E. Green Company (Mechanical)
                                            Douglas Steel Fabrication Corp. (Steel)

               Software                     RAM, RAM Advance, SDS/2, Bentley (TriForma suite and Project Wise), AutoCAD, Design
                                            Series, Quick Pen, IntelliCAD, Navisworks (see Table 9-1-2 for uses)

               Neutral Formats              SDNF, CIS/2

               BIM Areas                    3D BIM collaboration, interference detection, as-built documents,lean construction,
                                            just-in-time delivery, component fabrication

               Area                         442,000 sf

               Duration                     35 weeks

               Cost                         Not disclosed




c09.indd 328                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:43:53 AM
                                                                           9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion   329

               of the subcontractors (shown in Table 9-1-1) came from specialized fields in
               which BIM-related technologies had already been very successful. In particular,
               the steel manufacturers had already integrated BIM into their workflows.
               Similar developments had taken place for HVAC, piping, and industrial
               installations. This is due, in part, to the fact that these industries deal with a
               restricted set of well-defined elements.
                    In addition, for the purpose of integrating the partner firms into the BIM
               process, Ghafari co-located all of the detailing teams to a single site and offered
               training and consulting to those project team members who were not familiar
               with BIM technology and its associated processes. This was in addition to soft-
               ware vendors’ specific training. Because of the single project location, mode-
               ling issues and practices were addressed and resolved faster.


               9.1.3 The Design Process
               3D Direct Digital Workflow
               Apart from the time constraints, an additional challenge identified early-on was
               the need to issue the steel mill order within 3 weeks of the construction start
               date. If this deadline was missed, the mill-rolling cycle would result in a six-week
               delay for the steel delivery or an increase in cost for buying off-the-shelf prod-
               ucts. The solution was to completely eliminate paper-based delivery by handing
               the BIM model directly to the fabricator.
                     Eliminating the traditional 2D CAD paper-based workflow enabled a
               higher degree of parallelism by removing sequential steps. Additionally, over-
               head time for drawing layout, printing, and delivering was also eliminated. Of
               course, collaboratively working on a BIM model also opened-up other time-
               saving opportunities, such as collision detection and prefabrication, which
               given an appropriate model, could be implemented with relative ease.
                     Weekly meetings were held where the combined models where checked
               for interference and connection alignments with on-hand representatives from
               all firms. The working out of necessary alterations at the time they were identi-
               fied was vital to the project’s success.


               As-Built Before Construction
               Once the initial structural design was complete, an iterative process was initi-
               ated between the AE and the steel fabricator (Table 9-1-2). This process was
               based on a combined release of the 3D models prepared by individual parties.
               The fabricator received the model, extracted the steel quantities, and modeled
               the construction details. The AE reintegrated the steel fabrication model
               into the design model and checked for interferences. Using this approach, the




c09.indd 329                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:43:53 AM
          330 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-1-2
          Iterative process for
          the structural steel
          refinement.
          The steel order was
          issued within three
          weeks of the project’s
          start date. The model
          was declared ‘as-built’
          earlier in the process.




                                    structural design was finalized within a three-week timeframe, Mechanical-
                                    Electrical-Plumbing (MEP) design began in parallel, and subsequent activities
                                    were based on the as-built structural model before construction even started.
                                    In this way, the design and shop modeling phases were merged.
                                         Most internal reviews were performed using digital data, which introduced
                                    savings in overhead that are typically associated with paper-based workflows,
                                    although extraction shop drawings were still needed for approval purposes.
                                         Not only did the project team have access to the as-built model of the steel
                                    structure in advance of construction, but the laborious production of as-built
                                    documentation at the end of the project was eliminated. Tight integration of
                                    the fabricator and several iterations of design reviews effectively reduced costly
                                    change orders to almost zero.

                                    Lean design approach
                                    The application of 3D digital workflows was a key factor in the implementa-
                                    tion of supply chain management strategies and lean design principles and
                                    construction processes.
                                        Conceptually, during the lifecycle of a construction project, a project team is
                                    responsible for transforming labor and material into a building. In other words,
                                    design and construction can be viewed as a series of activities, where some add
                                    value and others do not, as shown in Figure 9-1-3. There are numerous time-
                                    consuming, non-value-adding activities in the design process, such as correction




c09.indd 330                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:43:53 AM
                                                                         9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion    331

                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-1-3
                                                                                                      These two charts
                                                                                                      illustrate the
                                                                                                      differences between
                                                                                                      the construction
                                                                                                      and manufacturing
                                                                                                      industries’ current
                                                                                                      business practices.
                                                                                                      (Source: Construction
                                                                                                      Industry Institute).




               of errors and rework, the physical handling and organization of documents, and
               transportation, inspection, and movement during the construction process.
                    As a leader in lean manufacturing, GM encourages the adoption and imple-
               mentation of lean principles throughout the design and construction process of
               all of its projects.
                    One problem inherent in a 2D paper-based workflow is the design team
               must follow sequential steps and make decisions based on known priorities.
               Often, the effect of a decision regarding a specific system or component on other
               systems is not immediately known. The natural outcome of this approach is
               extended duration for the design process, which is identified by frequent rework
               and corrections, a hefty volume of untraceable paper documents, and undetected

                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-1-4
                                                                                                      HVAC value stream.
                                                                                                      3D design models
                                                                                                      were shared with the
                                                                                                      sheet metal contractor,
                                                                                                      who refined them to
                                                                                                      include installation-
                                                                                                      level detailing. They
                                                                                                      then used the models
                                                                                                      to support CNC cutting
                                                                                                      equipment. HVAC
                                                                                                      was installed with zero
                                                                                                      changes in the field.




c09.indd 331                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:43:54 AM
          332 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               interferences and pending decisions that ultimately must be addressed on the
                               jobsite. Solving interferences after they are detected in the field costs owners
                               large amounts of money, extends the project duration, and reduces the quality of
                               the end product.
                                    Using lean construction concepts, the objective was to optimize the
                               process by:

                                  1. Improving the value-adding processes, and
                                  2. Reducing the number of non-value adding activities.

                                   These objectives were made possible by the continuous study of processes
                               aiming to:

                                   • Smooth interfaces among the parties involved in the process, and
                                   • Improve the flow of resources and information.

                                    Motivated by these goals, the team was able to completely rebuild the tradi-
                               tional processes and generate new ones for constructing a building extension of
                               high quality and acceptable cost in a safe environment.
                                    In this project, BIM tools helped the team apply lean design and construction
                               concepts in order to realize significant benefits. Using a 3D direct-digital work-
                               flow allowed the team to make instant and concurrent decisions through
                               collaboration with other entities and eliminate interferences using the Navis-
                               works automated collision detection tool. The design team was responsible for
                               managing the timely flow of information among various parties, in order that
                               they might interact more efficiently. Furthermore, the design team was responsi-
                               ble for reviewing installation-level models constructed by subcontractors. This
                               allowed for the resolution of all potential issues and interferences prior to the
                               start of construction. It also facilitated a change-order-free construction process.


                               Model exchange
                               Though most processes were made leaner by adopting digital document
                               exchanges, some overhead was introduced by the necessity of managing multi-
                               ple application tool formats and data exchange needs, as listed in Table 9-1-2.
                               The smooth exchange of data capability is an essential feature of BIM that
                               enables numerous applications to communicate seamlessly. The full realization
                               of smooth data exchange, however, is an ideal that has not yet been realized.
                               While some neutral format approaches are starting to demonstrate success, it
                               often remains necessary to devise workarounds, particularly when a direct
                               translation does not exist or cannot deliver the needed results.




c09.indd 332                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:43:55 AM
                                                                                   9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion        333

               Table 9-1-2 Model exchange workflows – Ghafari’s know-how provided the basis for ensuring
               seamless data exchanges.
                Model exchange workflows

                Steel Structure            RAM Advance → SDNF → custom code → TriForma → SDS/2

                                           SDS/2 → CIS/2 → TriForma

                                           TriForma → AutoCAD

                                           AutoCAD models available in TriForma – no translations
                Piping                     Design Series from early schematic to fabrication isometrics

                HVAC                       TriForma then traced over in IntelliCAD for CNC interfaces

                                           IntelliCAD models back to TriForma

                Fire Protection            Design Series for coordination

                Architecture               Bentley Architecture for TriForma through CDs

                Collision Detection        Navisworks for all coordination and interference checking, but same models were also shared in
                                           CAD formats in 3D for all team participants


                   Ghafari had already acquired substantial expertise in managing data
               exchanges, and the project team benefited from their knowledge. Though they
               generally rely on out-of-the-box solutions to save on the development and
               maintenance of software solutions, Ghafari found that some adaptations for
               addressing specific project requirements were occasionally needed, and these
               were made using the respective Application Programming Interfaces (APIs).
               Additionally, once a workflow was laid out and tested, automation was deployed
               to eliminate repetitive and error-prone tasks. It was due to these experiences
               that Gharfari was held responsible for ensuring that all translations were
               seamless.
                   An important element for communicating design changes and for imple-
               menting the newest models was a provision for a file exchange and collaborative
               server specialized for CAD content (Bentley ProjectWise). Retrospectively, it
               was felt that the major advantage of using such a server was the elimination of
               redundancy and potential error sources. It allowed all team members to access
               up-to-date project files at all times. The owner also appreciated the exchange
               server, as it provided continuous access to all project data and allowed for better
               monitoring of progress.

               Collision detection
               Multi-disciplinary collaboration was enhanced by relocating team members
               from all companies to a shared office environment. This enabled more efficient
               decision-making through direct communication. It also facilitated the use of




c09.indd 333                                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:43:56 AM
          334 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               Navisworks for interference collision detection. Structural elements, HVAC,
                               and piping were coordinated in the model, rather than on-site. The on-site
                               ‘first-come first-served’ approach for occupying installation space typically leads
                               to unnecessary costs. Required voids can be left for assembly teams to fill during
                               later stages, as shown in Figure 9-1-5. These voids were analyzed in detail dur-
                               ing the design process to guarantee not only enough space for physical installa-
                               tions but also for the additional space needed for placement of equipment.
                               Initial early iterations allowed for some overlapping elements to permit rough
                               layouts, but these tolerances were reduced to zero in the final sessions.
                                     It is estimated that 3,000 to 4,000 interferences were identified and
                               resolved, dealing with architectural components, structural steel, HVAC,
                               mechanical equipment, lighting, cable trays, busses, ducts, and industrial waste.
                               Decision-makers from all relevant teams met for collision detection sessions
                               and relied on virtual models, such as shown in Figure 9-1-5. Problems were
                               analyzed and the responsible partners committed to making the necessary
                               changes. Records of these decisions were distributed to all parties.
                                     It is striking that, even when collisions where discovered during the design
                               phase, the solutions often had a very patched-on-site character. The sheer
                               complexity of these numerous systems did not allow for optimizing solutions.
                               Additionally, some systems, such as the coolant piping for the manufacturing
                               lines, had to be integrated at a later stage, when most systems were already in
                               place. Time for optimizing these solutions was not available, leading to C- and
                               U-shaped route-arounds. These solutions not only required more work to
                               implement, but depending on the pipes’ usage, the resulting pressure loss may
                               have lead to further disadvantages, such as increased energy consumption
                               throughout the building’s lifecycle. Thus, even further improvements are
                               envisioned.




                               FIGURE 9-1-5 Avoided collisions.
                               3,000 to 4,000 interferences were detected and resolved. Despite finding problems at an earlier
                               stage, optimal solutions could not always be found.




c09.indd 334                                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:43:56 AM
                                                                        9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion     335

               Project management
               Apart from the BIM technologies mentioned above, the project management
               team also used a building block of the lean concept known as the “Kaizen
               Event.” One such event is shown in Figure 9-1-6. These meetings were sched-
               uled as needed. Kaizen events are short and focused workflow reengineering
               sessions attended by the owner, the designer, and other project participants.
                    During these four-hour events, which were conducted by Ghafari and
               attended by external BIM experts from other parties, the participants used
               techniques such as team empowerment, brainstorming, and problem solving.
               They rapidly mapped the existing processes, identified shortcomings, proposed
               improvements to the existing workflows by eliminating potential waste, and
               solicited buy-ins from all parties for implementing the new practices. Kaizen
               events not only provided tangible and immediate results but also fostered moti-
               vation for ongoing continuous improvements in the design and construction
               process.
                    The primary outcome of the Kaizen events in this project was eliminating
               the need for 2D drawing reviews and submittals. This accelerated the delivery of
               shop drawings and enabled the project team to meet the steel mill delivery
               deadlines and the MEP orders. In addition, Ghafari developed and maintained
               a ‘lessons learned’ document for the project duration and continuously solic-
               ited feedback from participants, owners, and other team members.
                    The project team did not use 4D technology for the purpose of construc-
               tion site-management or for the coordination of equipment assemblies,
               however, GM and Ghafari piloted this approach in subsequent projects.


                                                                                                     FIGURE 9-1-6
                                                                                                     Team meeting
                                                                                                     Decision makers from
                                                                                                     all parties during a
                                                                                                     ‘Kaizen–style’ collision
                                                                                                     detection meeting.




c09.indd 335                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:43:57 AM
          336 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               9.1.4 The Construction Process
                               During construction, the main benefits of BIM were an extraordinarily high
                               degree of prefabrication and preassembly and a well-organized construction
                               site. Fabricators assembled their systems into configurations that minimized
                               onsite requirements. They also relied on Just-In-Time (JIT) delivery of materi-
                               als and equipment, which was an outcome realized by complete coordination
                               prior to the start of construction.
                                    After many years of doing pilot projects with Ghafari, GM now demands
                               the highest level application of prefabrication and pre-assembly methods for its
                               projects. In this project, however, not all participants had experience in pre-
                               fabrication and pre-assembly. The HVAC and steel subcontractors were the only
                               parties experienced in this area, but even they had never worked to the extent
                               of the Flint project and with such a complex array of trade subcontractors.
                               Some other subcontractors, such as the piping contractors, first learned about
                               this process during the project.
                                    The detailed collision-free 3D model and the need for no field changes made
                               prefabrication and pre-assembly possible and resulted in a more precise materi-
                               als ordering process and time savings through the use of JIT delivery. This
                               reduced waste and its associated costs. The various field teams could install
                               their work based on the BIM model and rely on the proposed results.
                                    Because of this well-planned process, the steel structure erection was com-
                               plete 35 days early and without any changes during construction. Using the
                               prefabrication and pre-assembly approach, the HVAC and MEP systems were
                               installed without any onsite rework and in minimum time. Verification of
                               the virtual model’s consistency with the as-built is shown in Figure 9-1-7.
                                    In addition, since field changes and the movement of people and materials
                               onsite were minimal, site safety was improved. The morale of field teams was
                               high, and they had greater trust and pride in their work.


                               9.1.5 Plant Operation
                               The facility commenced operation in September 2006. It is too early to specu-
                               late about the possible positive effects that BIM will have on the facility’s oper-
                               ation. It is clear, however, that such a detailed representation of structural and
                               technical elements will be a considerable benefit, not only for facility manage-
                               ment but in the event of future expansion or alterations.


                               9.1.6 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
                               The overall success of the project was mainly due to good communication pro-
                               cedures and interfaces. All teams were working on fully-coordinated models,




c09.indd 336                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:43:58 AM
                                                                         9.1 Flint Global V6 Engine Plant Expansion    337

                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-1-7
                                                                                                      Overlay of the model
                                                                                                      with the built project
                                                                                                      demonstrates the
                                                                                                      ‘as-built’ nature of the
                                                                                                      model.




               allowing conflicts to be eliminated early on. No one wasted resources imple-
               menting unnecessary changes. Once all of the team members agreed to the use
               of BIM, Ghafari as the lead firm provided a unifying platform for all contractors.
               It was not an out-of-the-box solution, and some tweaking and know-how was
               necessary to enable frictionless procedures. In particular, collision detection
               workflows were based on best practices already used by Ghafari.
                    The 3D digital workflow enhanced the transition of information to project
               team members. It provided an environment in which they were able to interact
               and collaborate with each other more effectively and make real-time, inte-
               grated, and accurate decisions on a timely basis. Kaizen events were also useful
               in resolving problems and developing more effective processes.
                    Having eliminated many of the pitfalls in the early stages, the project was
               handled without big drawbacks. Time and money was saved despite the organ-
               izational overhead demanded by these communication protocols.
                    Most of the benefits extended seamlessly from design to construction, and
               many of BIM’s advantages could be readily seen during construction, such as a
               quiet and well-organized building site that reflected JIT delivery, high-levels of
               prefabrication, and hardly any material waste onsite. With only a few crews
               working at a time, safety for the various teams on the jobsite was kept high.
               Throughout the construction process, almost no changes were required. Mate-
               rial was saved during manufacturing due to the precise quantity listing.
                    As a result of automated collision detection, the design team estimated that
               3-5 % of the overall cost was saved and the 3D digital workflow contributed




c09.indd 337                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:43:58 AM
          338 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               an additional 2-4 % in cost and time savings. Thus, despite a tough time sched-
                               ule, work was finished with 5 weeks (12.5 %) to spare, without compromising
                               the expected quality. General Motors is vague in enumerating an exact savings,
                               so as to maintain a competitive advantage. However, the client, designer and
                               contractors unambiguously reported a high return on investment, leading to a
                               win-win situation.


                               Lessons Learned
                               A project benefits significantly when all subcontractors develop and work from
                               their own 3D digital models. In a partially 3D team, the limitations of those not
                               working in 3D will stand out.
                                   Continuous model exchange of detailing or posting to a server allows team
                               members to enter corrections while designing, not afterwards. This saves time.
                                   This project shows what careful planning and strategic scheduling can
                               accomplish to reduce the overlapping time of design and construction. Com-
                               pared to traditional DBB projects, the Flint Extension demonstrated that
                               through the use of a super-fast-tracked DB effort, project duration can be
                               reduced 50 percent. This very fast execution included the following:

                                   • A lean approach was adopted to closely integrate the design and
                                     construction processes to ensure smooth information flows from one to
                                     the other. The processes eliminated non-value adding steps, and appro-
                                     priate mechanisms were set up to ensure pull flows for information. In
                                     particular, engineering detailing activity was scheduled according to pull
                                     from the construction activities. The 3D BIM technology was critical in
                                     supporting these aspects of lean production system design and process
                                     flow control, eliminating the wasteful processes that are required when
                                     using 2D CAD.
                                   • Using full 3D modeling, many systems and groups of systems could be
                                     prefabricated and assembled offsite, reducing onsite work to placement
                                     and connection. Offsite work was more efficient and allowed for the
                                     application of automation tooling; offsite work did not encounter issues
                                     of congestion, temporary storage, material waste resulting from uncer-
                                     tainty regarding takeoff quantities, and weather and other onsite issues
                                     did not add waste.

                                    There are significant benefits of co-locating all detailing teams, with mode-
                               ling support for those just getting started. This approach prompted the sharing
                               of information and provided a flexible learning curve.




c09.indd 338                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:43:59 AM
                                                                 9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   339

                   Mechanical equipment routing, while greatly improved and collision-free,
               would have benefited from more and better conceptualizations as well as from
               layout planning prior to detailing. Such planning would eliminate most U- and
               C-route-arounds, which can reduce flow and pressure losses and adds extra
               hardware.
                   Fabricating ‘to the model’ can lead to an accurate as-built model for the
               owner.



                 Acknowledgments for GM Flint Case Study
                 This case study was originally written by Thomas Grasl and Hamed Kashani for Professor Chuck
                 Eastman in a course offered in the College of Architecture Ph.D. Program at the Georgia Institute
                 of Technology, Winter 2006 and has been adapted for use in this book. The authors thank Samir
                 Emdanat of Ghafari for providing much of the material in this case study. The authors also thank
                 General Motors for endorsing publication of this work.



                    9.2 UNITED STATES COAST GUARD
                        BIM IMPLEMENTATION
                           BIM for scenario planning and facility assessment
                   This case study consists of three projects that highlight the use of BIM for
               scenario planning at a project and enterprise level and for facility asset man-
               agement. The projects demonstrate the United States Coast Guard’s (USCG)
               effort to implement BIM to support tactical and strategic business missions
               using web-based services and open standards enabled by BIM and accessible to
               a wide range of users.

               9.2.1 Introduction
               The United States Coast Guard (USCG) plans, designs, builds, and manages a
               portfolio of 8,000 owned or leased buildings and nationwide land holdings.
               For any given project, the USCG may be the owner, tenant, or design team.
               These multiple perspectives give them many potential opportunities to apply
               BIM and re-engineer the processes of their Civil Engineering Division.
                   In 2001, the USCG determined that BIM was a foundation technology for
               their Shore Facility Capital Asset Management (SFCAM) Roadmap. This deci-
               sion was enabled by the Logistic Geospatial Information Center (LoGIC)
               under the direction of Paul Herold. David Hammond led the USCG SFCAM
               Roadmap effort, and members of the team included AECinfosystems, Inc.;




c09.indd 339                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:00 AM
          340 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                   Onuma, Inc.; MACTEC; Standing Stone Consulting; and Tradewinds, a change
                                   management group.
                                        The Roadmap (See Figure 9-2-1) is an enterprise focused on converging
                                   data and knowledge across multiple sectors—the various functional units
                                   within the USCG—to facilitate better decision-making for strategic asset plan-
                                   ning and missions. Integral to this vision is the notion that process changes that
                                   support the capture of data and knowledge throughout a project lifecycle and
                                   across projects will produce a more efficient and sustainable facility delivery
                                   and management process workflow. For the USCG, the lifecycle of a business
                                   decision spans a very wide range, from very early planning, design, and con-
                                   struction to facility management and disposal. Additionally, the Roadmap
                                   identifies the need to manage information about an organization including its
                                   functions and operations, which are often more valuable than the physical
                                   assets. Consequently, any effort to implement BIM or related technologies
                                   must support the integration of a wide variety of data and decision-making
                                   processes very early during planning and align those decisions with key busi-
                                   ness drivers.
                                        Figure 9-2-1 shows an example of the USCG Roadmap and the various
                                   milestones they have established with respect to the implementation of BIM.
                                   The following sections describe three projects that utilize BIM in the context
                                   of this Roadmap, for early design and facility operations and management.
                                   In these projects, BIM is the central enabling technology. Other technologies




          FIGURE 9-2-1                                                                                                                    Level II Building Models with Level IV spaces
                                                                                                                                                              (extended attribute data)
          The United States                                             Rapid Space         33 Million sf              35 Sectors                        9 OCCSU
                                                                          Calculator        Level 1 BIM                Completed
          Coast Guard’s                                                                                                                                  Sites Completed

          Roadmap for                                         Alameda
                                                                                                            Humboldt                      Puget                         Level 1 Building
          implementing BIM and                         Charleston                          San Diego            Bay                       Sound                        Models for various
                                                   Seattle                                                                                                                   USCG Sites
          their interoperability                                                                                       San Pedro            Bellingham

          goals.                         USCG BIM                                                                            Quillayute                          Ketchikan
                                     Marine Objects
                                                             30 + BIM           40 + BIM                               90 + BIM                            120 + BIM               180 + BIM
                                      BIM Pilot
                                   Project Start




                                        Jan 2004                                Jan 2005                                    Jan 2006                               Jan 2007

                                                                 SFCAM Road Map                SFCAM Road
                                                                                                                                                           OPS & Google Earth
                                                                     Phase I                   Map Phase II

                                                                                Sector Command Planning                      OCCSU Planning                      BIM Data in GIS

                                                                                                                        BIM & Assessment Data




c09.indd 340                                                                                                                                                                               1/16/08 11:44:00 AM
                                                                           9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation                 341

               such as Web portals, GIS, and databases were integrated with BIM to fulfill
               specific project requirements and meet the goals established by the USCG. The
               projects also highlight the process changes that were necessary to successfully
               implement BIM and achieve an integrated process and data model.
                   Table 9-2-1 provides an overview of the participants and goals of the three
               projects.

               9.2.2 BIM for Facility Assessment and Planning
               The USCG continually assesses the condition of existing facilities, their mission
               dependency, and current space utilization. These metrics are used to analyze
               enterprise planning, including whether to renovate or maintain existing facili-
               ties or build new ones. In the traditional process, a team would collect and
               create floor plans of existing facilities and repeat this effort every few years. The
               analysis effort would occur in parallel with separate documents that typically



               Table 9-2-1     Overview of the USCG and its partner service providers. projects.
                Project name          Integrated Support Command            Sector Command Centers                Off Cycle Crew Support Units
                                      (ISC) Alameda project                                                       (OCCSU)

                Location              Alameda site                          35 sites                              9 sites

                Project Description   Consolidate and integrate             Perform conceptual design of          Perform multiple what-if
                                      facility assessment information       35 sector command facilities          scenarios for future projects
                                      into a single data repository         and define requirements for           related to installations of new
                                                                            those facilities                      boats, including operational,
                                                                                                                  staffing, cost, and security
                                                                                                                  analysis

                Project duration      3 Months                              6 months                              5 months
                                      Model of Alameda
                                      Island was created earlier by
                                      AECinfosystems, Inc.,Onuma, Inc.

                BIM application       Facility assessment and asset         Conceptual planning and               Rapid conceptual planning
                                      management                            requirement definition                and analysis

                Key Participants                                        USCG Headquarters -SFCAM
                                                                        Logistics Geospatial Integration Center
                                                                        USCG Headquarter, Civil Engineering
                                                                        CEU Oakland
                                                                        FD & CC Pacific
                                                                        Onuma, Inc.
                                                                        AECinfosystems, Inc.
                                                                        NexDSS, MACTEC
                                                                        Standing Stone Consulting, Inc.




c09.indd 341                                                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:44:00 AM
          342 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               are not directly associated or linked to the floor plan or facility documentation.
                               For the USCG, this type of task was ripe for leveraging intelligent objects in
                               BIM applications to optimize data entry, knowledge capture, and data report-
                               ing, as shown in their facility assessment Roadmap in Figure 9-2-2. This Road-
                               map communicates the ideal assessment workflow utilizing BIM to capture and
                               store assessment information.

                               Requirements for a Facility Assessment System
                               A critical requirement for implementing a BIM-enabled assessment process is to
                               ensure that the facility objects are modeled once—either during the design and
                               construction process or post-construction—and assessment teams can associate
                               those components with the following types of assessment information:

                                   • Facility Condition Index represents the condition of various parts of the
                                     building, roof, walls, windows, and equipment etc. Each building com-
                                     ponent or aggregate of components, i.e., a building system, is associated
                                     with a numerical index typically assigned based on field surveys and
                                     ranging from 0 (failure) to 100 (all of its design life remaining).
                                   • Mission Dependency Index represents parts of the facilities that are
                                     critical to business or mission operations, with a value of 100 represent-
                                     ing a system with highest priority and 0 with lowest priority relative to
                                     a mission.
                                   • Space Utilization Index represents the compliance of the actual space to
                                     USCG standards. A 1.0 value indicates a space complying exactly with
                                     USCG space standards, and values between .95 (slightly less than allow-
                                     able) and 1.15 (slightly greater than allowable) are reasonable.

                                    Although data will change over time—based on physical and operational
                               changes—the system should support ongoing manual updates, and automatic
                               updates. Some of the assessment data can be more readily updated or calcu-
                               lated using intelligent rules or associations with other enterprise data systems.
                               Furthermore, the staff equipped with the knowledge and expertise to update
                               this data is not typically trained in 2D or 3D CAD systems. The system must
                               allow such staff to enter the data without extensive training. Finally, the system
                               needs to support reporting capabilities for communicating information and
                               analyses to a broad constituency, ranging from design professionals to laymen.

                               Description of the Facility Assessment System
                               The USCG contracted Onuma, Inc. and AECinfosystems, Inc. to develop and
                               implement a BIM based assessment system. These service providers were




c09.indd 342                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:44:01 AM
                                                               9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   343

                                                                                                  FIGURE 9-2-2A
                                                                                                  Roadmap for facility
                                                                                                  assessment showing
                                                                                                  the ideal information
                                                                                                  and process workflow
                                                                                                  to support facility
                                                                                                  assessment based on
                                                                                                  a building information
                                                                                                  model database.




                                                                                                  FIGURE 9-2-2B
                                                                                                  Assessment process
                                                                                                  as outlined in the
                                                                                                  Roadmap.




               proficient with a variety of BIM tools as well as other enabling technologies,
               such as databases and Web-based tools. Additionally, Onuma and AECinfosys-
               tems had the expertise to model the facilities and to work with and train the
               USCG staff for widespread implementation. Both companies were familiar




c09.indd 343                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:44:01 AM
          344 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                    with the USCG organization and were involved in the Roadmap efforts. One
                                    challenge for the service providers was working within the task-centric or
                                    project-oriented deliverables mandated by USCG contracts.
                                         Consequently, the development of various assessment tools and implemen-
                                    tation and training of new assessment work processes spanned several projects.
                                    The service providers understood that integrating these disparate processes
                                    was a central goal governing the project’s success and successfully developed
                                    and customized an assessment system over several projects and contracts.
                                         Off-the-shelf BIM tools have built-in features to define custom objects and
                                    properties (see Chapter 2); but they lack the ability to integrate objects within
                                    enterprise systems such as central databases, and they cannot access compo-
                                    nent information via the Web. To address these shortcomings, Onuma, Inc.
                                    customized the ONUMA Planning System™ (OPS), a Web-enabled application
                                    that links Building Information Modeling (BIM) design tools with a central
                                    database built on open source environments (MySQL™ and Apache™).
                                         For the assessment project, the critical components of OPS were the links
                                    between the BIM design tool (ArchiCAD®), a central model repository, and
                                    the Web portal for entering and viewing assessment data. The system is
                                    based on open standards including IFCs and XML to support interoperability
                                    and integration; and it includes interfaces to applications that are vital to the
                                    information or process workflows, such as Microsoft© Excel for data entry and
                                    reporting and Google™ Earth for earth-based visualizations.

          FIGURE 9-2-3
          The different levels
          of detail in a building
          information model.




c09.indd 344                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:02 AM
                                                                 9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   345

                    The data for facility information on the ISC project came from multiple
               teams and sources, including: 1) existing 2D drawings, 2) existing ArchiCAD
               building models, 3) assessment data from multiple assessment teams, 4) data
               from field assessors, and 5) new data created in ArchiCAD. Most critical was
               the as-built data. As-built room (zone objects in ArchiCAD and space objects
               in OPS) and building objects established the project information work break-
               down structure and standards. Each of these objects was assigned a unique
               identifier (ID); and when combined with the building ID, this creates a
               unique identifier reference. Any data associated with the project must be asso-
               ciated with one of these core building objects via the ID.
                    After a team creates a Level 2 or Level 3 building model, the team exports
               it to a database which acts as the central data repository and model server. The
               database is populated with various building objects, each with its own unique
               identifier and associated object parameters (such as variable dimensions) and
               properties (such as the assessment index values shown in Figure 9-2-4). Once
               the building data is in the database, teams can access the model data via a Web
               interface and edit or update the object parameters and properties as shown in
               Figure 9-2-4. Many of the properties require that the user select from a pre-
               defined list of values to ensure validity and to mitigate potential data entry
               errors. For smaller projects, manual data entry is feasible. For example, a user
               can open a space setting, use pull down menus to see how the space is utilized,
               and manually select its mission readiness index. The user can repeat this proc-
               ess for doors, windows, walls, and assessment objects. In many cases, a user
               must adjust multiple properties for each object.
                    On large projects, entering data in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet can
               greatly expedite data entry and the updating processes. The teams can import
               data from the Microsoft Excel file into the OPS database only if the building
               object contains a valid room ID and object property values. The OPS workflow
               requires that teams conform to the standards, and it enforces consistency. Any
               view of the building assessment data links to this database. Thus, if a team
               opens the building model in ArchiCAD after additional assessment data
               updates, the updates are available within the ArchiCAD environment.
                    Different methodologies for entering data in the OPS system support scal-
               ability and flexibility. An average building requires that teams enter or edit
               10,000 data points or object property values, and each of these data points
               requires ongoing management. For a site encompassing ten facilities, the com-
               plexity of managing the assessment workflow process and managing the data
               dramatically increases. Thus, OPS provides multiple ways for teams to enter
               data, manually or automatically, via the web, spreadsheets, or BIM environ-
               ments; and OPS manages the data in a central BIM-based model server.




c09.indd 345                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:03 AM
          346 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-2-4
          Interfaces to input
          room information in
          OPS.
          A) View of room (zone)
          in BIM authoring
          tool with data from
          OPS; B) A custom
          zone-object interface
          in the ArchiCAD®
          environment;
          C) User-defined room
          stamps to display data
          from OPS in ArchiCAD;
          D) Room (space) visual
          UI in web-based OPS
          environment; and
          E) room data view in
          OPS.




                                   Use of the Planning System on the ISC Project
                                   The USCG is faced with documenting and assessing over 33 million square
                                   feet of facilities. To test its Roadmap goals, the team (See Table 9-2-1 for list
                                   of team members) implemented the assessment system for the Integrated Sup-
                                   port Command (ISC Alameda), located on Coast Guard Island in Alameda,
                                   CA. The ISC site contains thirty-five facilities totalling 700,000. This medium-
                                   scale implementation of OPS involved:

                                       • Documenting 35 facilities at the Level 3 BIM detail, consisting of spaces,
                                         walls, doors, and windows
                                       • Attaching assessment data and metrics to facility objects
                                       • Managing updates to the assessment data




c09.indd 346                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:44:03 AM
                                                                   9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   347

                   The as-built documentation consisted primarily of paper drawings or 2D
               CAD files. The as-built data was created in ArchiCAD using a combination of
               custom room and building objects, custom USCG objects, and built-in Archi-
               CAD objects. These included:

                   • Site plan with features
                   • Buildings
                   • Interior walls
                   • Doors and windows
                   • Furniture and equipment
                   • Assessment data associated with each object

                    Figure 9-2-5A shows a sample building model and the level of detail for
               that model. Figure 9-2-5B shows a Web-based data view of a room object with
               a list of associated doors, windows, and parameters and properties for all
               objects as well as the room’s assessment status.
                    The assessment information came from multiple teams, many not trained
               to use ArchiCAD. The OPS’ Web interface provided a simple and easy way to
               enter assessment data while situated in the office or field. For example, captur-
               ing knowledge about hazardous materials is critical to each assessment.
               The team in the field records the types of hazards (lead paint, asbestos, etc.), the
               degree of the condition, its quantity, location, height above the finish floor, and


                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-2-5
                                                                                                      Plan view showing
                                                                                                      assessment values
                                                                                                      assigned to each
                                                                                                      room and an
                                                                                                      integrated assessment
                                                                                                      data table combining
                                                                                                      data from multiple
                                                                                                      facilities.




c09.indd 347                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:04 AM
          348 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-2-6
          A) Schedule to view
          hazardous material
          data from all
          hazardous material
          objects in a building.
          B) Plan view showing
          the hazardous object
          symbols. C) 3D views of
          the hazardous material
          object.




                                    other data points directly in the model. They can create a new hazard object,
                                    add it to the model, and enter object parameters via pull-down menus for quick
                                    capture with the added benefit of data consistency across team members.
                                         Upon return to the office, the team can generate a report in schedule form
                                    that summarizes information captured in the field or related to a specific room
                                    (Figure 9-2-5B).
                                         One of the teams used specialized software called Vertex® (an engineering
                                    management system) to calculate the condition index based on the density and
                                    severity of observable defects (Mactec 2007). Using Microsoft Excel’s import
                                    tool, the teams were able to automatically populate building objects with con-
                                    dition index values exported from Vertex.
                                         By employing these methods to enter asset data and combining the infor-
                                    mation into an integrated model, the team reduced the updating effort by 98%
                                    compared to the traditional manual-based data entry and updating of assess-
                                    ment information. Table 9-2-2 shows a comparison between the manual
                                    method of updating information and the BIM-based method, either at the crea-
                                    tion of asset information, post-construction, or during regular assessment
                                    updates. The time required to edit a single data point is reduced from two to
                                    .04 seconds. This amount represents time savings derived from several sources,
                                    including automatic updates from Vertex, Microsoft Excel data, and the reduc-
                                    tion in manual errors. The overall time savings is significant when spread
                                    across four projects.

                                    Lessons Learned from Small-Scale Implementation of a BIM-Based
                                    Assessment System
                                    A BIM tool alone is insufficient to support enterprise level demands for knowl-
                                    edge capture and sharing, but it is integral to the process. OPS allowed the




c09.indd 348                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:44:05 AM
                                                                  9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   349

               Table 9-2-2 Comparison of the manual and BIM-based assessment
               processes for the USCG, based on Alameda project data.
                                                  Manual BIM            Database and BIM-Based

                Typical Building Size (SF)         20,000                     20,000
                Data Points Per Bldg               10,000                     10,000

                Data Points Per SF                 .5                         .5
                USCG Total SF                      33,000,000                 33,000,000

                USCG Data Points                   16,500,000                 16,500,000
                Time to Edit One Data              2                          .04
                Point (sec)

                Total Time in Hours                9,166                      183 hours
                4 Iterations Per Project           36,666                     733 hours

               USCG to integrate building information model data with enterprise data from
               other analysis tools, such as Vertex in a usable and integrative manner that
               supports critical work processes, reduces the effort required to update data,
               and improves quality and accuracy.

               9.2.3 BIM for Scenario Planning
               The USCG must rapidly adopt and respond to ever-changing missions. In
               response to the 9/11 terrorist attacks, budgetary constraints, altered mission
               objectives and other factors. It established requirements for integrating the
               Group Commander and port operations into a single Sector Command Center.
               This presented a unique challenge. Not only did they need to define a new facil-
               ity type and develop official standards for it, but they had to rapidly plan 35 of
               these centers in strategic locations as quickly as possible.

               Requirements for BIM-based Scenario Planning System
               The USCG needed a system that provided the structure and template for a Sector
               Command Center that would enable teams to rapidly design them while con-
               forming to specified space standards. At the start of the project, however, these
               standards did not exist, or were incomplete; nor did the templates for defin-
               ing them. Thus, the system needed to include functionality for consistently
               defining space standards and features for application to new facility designs.

               Description of the Scenario Planning System
               The USCG contracted Onuma, Inc. and AECinfosystems, Inc. to develop and
               implement a scenario-based planning system using OPS. The goal was to create




c09.indd 349                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:05 AM
          350 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-2-7
          A) A sample room
          showing a template
          layout and a list of
          furniture for the room;
          B) A USCG furniture
          library; and C) Samples
          of room templates in
          2D and 3D views.




                                    a system that supported scenario planning without any training or understand-
                                    ing of BIM, yet the system had to be integrated with a building model. The way
                                    this was accomplished was by using a Web-based interface that worked with
                                    BIM through OPS.
                                         Figure 9-2-7, 9-2-8, and 9-2-9 shows various parts of the Sector Command
                                    Center planning tool:

                                       1. Project management (Figure 9-2-8A) is a Web portal to access cur-
                                          rent projects and scenarios (schemes) and to create new projects. A
                                          specific Sector Command Center, for example, might have three or four
                                          schemes or design options. Users can import the functional require-
                                          ments. Functional Requirements are data rich space and/or room
                                          models that support additional information to support rapid decision
                                          processes and extraction of data. Additional information may include
                                          metric data such as Mission Dependency Index, space use requirements,
                                          equipment, level of security, costing, adjacencies, etc.
                                       2. Building planner (Figure 9-2-8A, B) provides the user with a high-level
                                          layout of a single floor of a Sector Command Center consisting of room
                                          objects based on room templates (See Figure 9-2-8A). A command center
                                          could be a stand-alone facility or part of an existing or new facility.




c09.indd 350                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:44:06 AM
                                                                9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   351

                  3. 2D Room layout (Figure 9-2-7B) is a detailed view of a room or room
                     template with the ability to modify and edit the layout if the user has
                     edit privileges. The room view also includes a list of the associated fur-
                     niture and room properties and parameters.
                  4. 3D Room layout (Figure 9-2-7C) 3D view of a room for visualization
                     purposes.
                  5. Export utilities include exporters to ArchiCAD, AutoCAD or in IFC
                     format.
                  6. Reporting tools provide the user with multiple ways to view a scenario
                     and related analyses (similar to those in Figures 9-2-4 A, B, and C).


               Implementation of the Scenario Planning System
               OPS provided the USCG with a tool for generating and comparing Sector Com-
               mand Center designs. Through charrettes, the teams used the system to design
               and evaluate Sector Command Centers in various locations. At the start of
               the project, the team had a set of initial room templates and programmatic
               requirements based on previous projects. Throughout the process, these template


                                                                                                   FIGURE 9-2-8
                                                                                                   The workflow of
                                                                                                   the OCCSU Planner
                                                                                                   system.
                                                                                                   A) the project
                                                                                                   management portal
                                                                                                   to create schemes, B)
                                                                                                   the building planner
                                                                                                   to design a scheme
                                                                                                   using building program
                                                                                                   data, C) refinement
                                                                                                   of the scheme from
                                                                                                   masses, relationships
                                                                                                   between spaces in a
                                                                                                   bubble diagram, to
                                                                                                   more detailed massing
                                                                                                   and then a building
                                                                                                   information model; and
                                                                                                   D) publishing of the
                                                                                                   model and viewing the
                                                                                                   scheme in the project
                                                                                                   site.




c09.indd 351                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:44:07 AM
          352 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-2-9
          Views of building
          model data created
          and developed in
          the OCCSU Planner
          system.
          2D layout views in
          A) Archicad and
          B) web-based OPS
          system. Views of the
          intelligent relationships
          between spaces and
          other objects such as
          C) adjacency and avoid
          relationships between
          spaces; and D) a 2D
          bomb blast object for
          security analysis.
          E) View of the building
          model detail produced
          from the scenario
          planning system
          including floors and
          furniture.




                                      designs evolved and the requirements changed. The management features of
                                      OPS allowed them to build template rooms and record new requirements. As a
                                      new Sector Command Center was designed, they often discovered missing tem-
                                      plate rooms and other necessary requirement changes. This self-documenting




c09.indd 352                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:44:07 AM
                                                                     9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   353

               Table 9-2-3 Metrics for implementing BIM-based scenario planning for the
               design of Sector Command Centers.
                                                                                BIM-based design
                                                           Traditional Design      with OPS

                Number of Projects                            35                   35

                Average size each                             5,000 sf             5,000 sf

                Average time to complete design for one       10 Months            1 Month
                project using traditional process

                Total time to complete 35 projects using      350 Months           6 Months
                traditional processes

                Estimated savings for design only                                  344 Months


               process was a direct byproduct of the use of a data-rich and visually interactive
               environment.
                    Over a period of six months, the team successfully generated conceptual
               designs and related requirements for 35 sector command facilities. Tradition-
               ally, each project would take 10 months as documented in Table 9-2-3. With
               OPS, the conceptual design process was reduced to one month. With OPS, the
               team could analyze each design in terms of functional requirements, cost, and
               conformance with USCG standards. Similar to the ICS project, the use of tem-
               plates forced consistency. When the teams discovered a need for a new room
               template or modification to an existing one, the system automatically captured
               these requirements.
                    At the conclusion of concept design for each facility, the team produced
               programmatic requirements for the sector command facility, 2D and 3D con-
               ceptual layouts, and reports documenting the equipment and furniture lists.
               This detail at the conceptual stage provided the USCG with much richer infor-
               mation to bid and procure a facility in a less time.

               Lessons Learned from the Implementation of a BIM-Based
               Scenario Planning System
               The parametric template-based approach to scenario planning dramatically
               reduced the overall time required to design each Sector Command Center. It
               allowed the USCG to continually build new prototype requirements and deve-
               lop standards, even as they were designing and as new mission requirements
               evolved. OPS provided the benefits of building information modeling via an
               easy-to-use interface for early conceptual design, and it provided the teams
               with rapid feedback and real-time analysis of conceptual designs in visual and




c09.indd 353                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:44:08 AM
          354 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               interactive formats. The rapid analysis capability allowed decisions to be made
                               faster and eliminate options that would not support the needs of the client.

                                   Quotes from USCG Personnel discussing benefits of SCCP:

                                   “The main benefit from using a system like this goes beyond the actual process
                                   of designing and coming to consensus with a large group of stakeholders. The
                                   process of using an integrated system like this in itself creates an engine that
                                   supplies answers and collects knowledge that can be used in many different
                                   ways beyond the immediate need to define the requirements for a project. ”

                                   “The Sector Command Center Planning Tool was the genesis of the Web-
                                   enabled, rapid planning, 3-D system. Planners all over the Coast Guard
                                   used this tool to generate 35 detailed reports in a matter of six months with
                                   little to no training on the intuitive SCC Tool. We have found that this has
                                   categorically improved communication in the early planning stages between
                                   our engineers, architects and our customers.”

                                                                VK Holtzman-Bell, Captain US Coast Guard


                               9.2.4 OCCSU System
                               The previous two projects focused on facility asset management and conceptual
                               design. The OCCSU project addresses the feasibility phase of a project when an
                               owner like the USCG must make critical and costly decisions to define a project
                               and align the business drivers (demand) with available facilities. The business
                               drivers for the OCCSU project are new cutters (ships) that will be completed
                               over the next 10–12 years. These boats represent a new business model and a
                               new project type for the USCG. The delivery date and location is unknown, but
                               the USCG must plan for their deployment and be ready to procure the work for
                               design and construction as delivery dates and locations are finalized.

                               Requirements for the OCCSU System
                               All variables in the OCCSU project are dynamic including timing, function,
                               organization, and location. Each new boat might require 100 people on standby
                               support and crew rotation. Scenarios such as how to rotate crews and support
                               the boats, would have a direct impact on what facilities would be needed. This
                               would entail facilities for housing standby support and crews and the mainte-
                               nance of shores-side facilities and command centers. Thus, scenario planning
                               would entail visualization of the entire site, multiple facilities, and individual
                               buildings across multiple floors.
                                   The template-based approach to designing the Sector Command Centers
                               was the starting point for the OCCSU project; and the assessment models




c09.indd 354                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:08 AM
                                                                  9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   355

               developed for the ICS project provided some of the as-built information. Two
               critical pieces were required to support the what-if scenarios: 1) links to a
               geospatial database or GIS system, where most existing information resided
               and 2) richer analysis tools to support analysis of the scenarios. The most
               important types of analyses were related to security.

               Implementation of the OCCSU System
               There were about ten sites that the USCG chose to evaluate for the OCCSU
               project. Some sites were part of their previous efforts to produce as-built mod-
               els of their facilities, such as for the ICS project. These facilities were already
               in OPS and existed in ArchiCAD. Other sites only had 2D site building draw-
               ings and some buildings had no information at all. For example, Figure 9-2-9
               shows a 3D view of one of the project sites consisting of various levels of
               details for each facility. This model also serves as an interface to a project and
               its various scenarios (schemes).
                    Each project can have multiple schemes, and each scheme represents a
               specific project location and associated requirements. The workflow is similar
               to that described for the Sector Command Center planning system. The team
               starts with a template or defines a new one. They view the space in 2D or 3D
               and define and create one or multiple floors. The addition of new furniture or
               equipment is only from a USCG approved furniture database.
                    Each space can have adjacency or avoid relationships with other spaces,
               and the team can view these in the 2D layout view, as shown in Figure 9-2-9.
               As a scenario is created, the team can view reports that show cost (based on
               square footage historical data) or building capacity. (A LEED analysis check-
               list was added to OPS after OCCSU). At any time they can export the sce-
               nario to IFC or ArchiCAD (via XML) to view the facility in 3D and add
               walls, doors, and windows. For security analyses, they can add a blast object
               from a database, which represents different types and sizes of blasts (shown
               in Figure 9-2-9B).

               Lessons Learned
               The OCCSU planning system demonstrates how owners can use BIM to sup-
               port enterprise scenario planning to define and evaluate projects before they
               are financed or funded. OPS provides the USCG planning teams with an inte-
               grated and shared operational picture of various scenarios to support real
               time decision making. The decision-making shifts to a much earlier part of the
               design process and allows the USCG planning teams to predict the potential
               outcomes of various ‘what-if ’ scenarios. This type of scenario based planning
               is different from today’s reactive, linear, and time consuming approach to




c09.indd 355                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:09 AM
          356 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               facility design and construction. These process changes yield significant bene-
                               fits, yet require significant cultural and contractual changes.
                                     Today’s contractual methods are designed to support the single project
                               approach. To extend the success of the OCCSU Planning System enterprise-wide
                               within the Coast Guard, the contracts and relationships with consultants will need
                               to change and evolve to support multiple projects, non-linear processes, and inte-
                               grative approaches. Today, BIM is commonly used as a tool for architects to design
                               a project and create construction drawings within a well-defined deliverable based
                               process. When BIM is integrated with metric data and supported at an enterprise
                               level, it becomes a visual decision tool for strategic planning. It also feeds the
                               architectural design tasks with useful and more complete information from the cli-
                               ent. Issues related to contracting services to add this metric data, often from mul-
                               tiple services and across projects, still exist and need to be addressed.
                                     For the USCG, and other owners, the investment in the site and building
                               data can payoff tremendously if the data is integrated, consistent, and accessi-
                               ble. That is, the USCG needs to ensure that any service provider can have access
                               to the data, such as templates, and leverage enterprise data. Since the OCCSU
                               system forces normalization, all services providers should benefit from access to
                               as-built data and integration of site and other operational data.

                                   Quotes Summarizing Benefits of OCCSU

                                   The Onuma Planning System shifted the reality of true scenario based planning
                                   to an enterprise level, enabling us to link shore facilities and infrastructure to
                                   mission execution and strategic Coast Guard wide outcomes. This better ena-
                                   bled us to allocate infrastructure resources to the most important mission
                                   execution and outcomes.

                                   The integration of BIM, geospatial data, real property data and mission require-
                                   ments supports the need of a common operational picture for the USCG. This
                                   common operational picture can be real time tactical information as well as longer
                                   term strategic information, which is enabled by the Onuma Planning System.

                                                                             David Hammond, Chief,
                                                SFCAM Division Commandant, (CG-434) US Coast Guard


                               9.2.5 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
                               These projects demonstrate the dramatic cost and time savings associated with
                               BIM-based planning and facility asset management. Much of the savings are
                               attributed to standardizing work processes and capturing knowledge digitally,
                               rather than through labor intensive manual processes. In implementing these
                               BIM-based systems, the key lessons learned were:




c09.indd 356                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:44:09 AM
                                                                9.2 United States Coast Guard BIM Implementation   357

                   • BIM-based work processes require significant cultural changes. These
                     range from simple work process changes related to digital data entry
                     to working with templates instead of freeform design. To prepare and
                     plan for the impact of these changes, the USCG understood that wide-
                     scale implementation would require realistic roadmaps, and they opted
                     to perform small-scale implementations, such as the ISC project, before
                     implementing large-scale efforts, such as the OCCSU project.
                   • It is imperative to make BIM accessible to a wide range of users. Broad
                     access to the model for viewing and editing as well as creating scenarios
                     was paramount to the success of OPS on these projects.
                   • Parametric object-based tools provide the building blocks for capturing
                     knowledge and project requirements that inevitably change over time.
                   • BIM promotes standards and work processes designed on BIM-based
                     OPS, which forced data normalization, reduced errors, and increased
                     the value and quality of as-built information.

                   The value of the information from multiple projects such as the ISC
               Project, Sector Command Center Planning System and OCCSU Planning
               System exponentially increases as more integration happens. Unexpected
               connections between data in these projects, such as the value of the as-built
               assessment data in the ISC to the ‘what-if ’ scenario planning in OCCSU dem-
               onstrate a return on the investment in an integrated, consistent, and standard
               enterprise building model.




                 Acknowledgments for USCG Case Study
                 The authors are indebted to Kimon Onuma of Onuma, Inc. and Dianne Davis of AECinfosystems,
                 Inc. for their assistance in providing the information contained in this case study. Additional par-
                 ticipants that were instrumental include: from USCG Headquarters Captain Jay Manik and David
                 Hammond, Lieutenant Commander Robert Bevins, (SFCAM) Lieutenant Commander Scott Gesele,
                 and William Logan, and Hassan Zaidi (Civil Engineering), Commander James Dempsey from CEU
                 Oakland; and from FD&CC Pacific Captain Virginia Holtzmanbell, William Scherer, and Jeffrey
                 Brockus; Paul Herold and team from the Logistics Geospatial Integration Center; Jim Watson and
                 team from NexDSS (Mactec); Ian Thompson and team from Standing Stone Consulting, Inc.

                 All figures were provided courtesy of Onuma, Inc. and AECinfoystems, Inc.




c09.indd 357                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:44:10 AM
          358 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                         9.3 CAMINO MEDICAL GROUP MOUNTAIN
                                             VIEW MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING COMPLEX
                                                BIM for design and construction coordination and integration
                                                with lean processes

                                    9.3.1 Description of Project
                                    The El Camino Medical Office Building and Parking Garage are located in Moun-
                                    tain View, CA in the San Francisco Bay Area. The medical center is intended for
                                    short-term (one-day) medical care and surgery. It is operated by the Camino
                                    Medical Group (CMG), which has 6 clinics on the Bay Peninsula and functions
                                    as a division of the Palo Alto Medical Foundation (PAMF). Sutter Health is its
                                    parent organization. The project manager, John Holms, played an important role
                                    in promoting the creation and use of 3D models in conjunction with lean con-
                                    struction techniques. Figure 9-3-1 is a rendering of the facility, based on the
                                    architect’s design. Note the large covered garage in front of the office building,
                                    which is required to accommodate the daily influx of staff and patients.
                                         As of November, 2006, the project was near complete, with an expected
                                    turn-over to the owner planned for April 2007. This date is about 6 months
                                    earlier than a traditional design-bid-build delivery model and represents a sig-
                                    nificant benefit to the owner and the project team. This case study describes
                                    how this was achieved. Table 9-3-1 provides an overview of the scope of the
                                    project and Table 9-3-2 lists the key milestones for the project.

                                    9.3.2 General Description of Project Management Techniques
                                    The project team evolved from the traditional model (shown in Figure 9-3-2)
                                    to the integrated model (shown in Figure 9-3-3) to allow for the effective use
                                    of a 3D model and lean construction techniques.



          FIGURE 9-3-1
          Visualization of El
          Camino Medical Office
          Building and Parking
          Garage.
          Image provided courtesy
          of DPR Construction,
          Inc.




c09.indd 358                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:44:10 AM
                                           9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex   359

               Table 9-3-1    The scope of the project.
                           Site & Infrastructure development   420,790 sf

                                           Parking Structure   1,110 stalls, 420,000 sf

                                    Medical Office Building    110 Providers, 250,000 sf

                                        Urgent Care Center     6,000 sf

                                  Outpatient Surgery Center    5 Suites, 20,000 sf

                                                  Pharmacy     6,000 sf

                Laboratory and Diagnostics Radiology Center    30,000 sf

                                         Construction Costs    $94.5 Million



               Table 9-3-2     Milestones for the project.
                                             Start of design   October 2003

                                              DPR engaged      April 2004

                                Schematic Design complete      November 2004

                                     Detail Design complete    March 2005

                           Construction Design (9 packages)    Nov. 2004 – Nov. 2005

                                       Start of Construction   February 2005

                                           Completion Date     April 2007


                    While a typical design-bid-build project would prevent subcontractors
               from detailing the design until after the project was bid, an integrated
               organization (Figure 9-3-3) allowed the general contractor and subcontractors
               to add constructability knowledge to the design as it developed. The collabora-
               tion was enhanced by weekly meetings held in a large trailer room at the project
               site. This space was also used by detailers working under the subcontractors,
               to allow for quicker resolution of conflicts. The goals established by the owner
               are summarized in Table 9-3-3.
                    The primary goal of the owner was to reduce overall project duration so that
               the clinic could be operational as soon as possible. To achieve this goal, construc-
               tion was started before detailed design was complete. Each design assist mechan-
               ical and electrical subcontractor was asked to provide a 3D model of their portion
               of the design to be merged with the 3D models provided by the architect and
               structural engineer. The general contractor managed the technology and required
               that the model be maintained on its servers at the job site. Various software tools
               were used to design in 2D or 3D, as shown in Table 9-3-4. For members of the




c09.indd 359                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:11 AM
          360 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-3-2
          Traditional project
          team used at the start
          of the project.




          FIGURE 9-3-3                                   SHJ                      SWA
          An integrated                                  Civil                  Landscape            W&W
          project team evolved                                                                                     DPR
          early in the project,             Watry                                                                  GC
          allowing for improved            (Parking                             Sutter
                                        Structure A/E)                   Facility Planning &
          integration, an                                                  Development                                 KPFF
          overlap of design                  DPR                                                                     Structural
                                           Concrete                                                 DPR              Engineers
          and construction, a
          reduction in redundant            CECI          Hawley Peterson and               Construction Manager
                                         Mechanical             Snyder                       General Contractor
          effort, and savings in                                                              Project Manager
                                          Engineer            Architects
          time.
                                                                                                                        TEE
          Adapted from image             Southland                                                                   Electrical
          provided courtesy of             HVAC                         Camino Medical Group                         Engineer
          DPR Construction, Inc.
                                                  JWM
                                                Plumbing
                                                                            Northstar                          CEI
                                                                         Fire protection                   (Electrical)
                                                Owner                 Architecture/                Construction Companies
                                                Companies             Engineering Firms




                                   team using 2D tools, they were required to either convert their designs to 3D or
                                   hire a consultant for this task. When selections of designers and subcontractors
                                   were made, emphasis was placed on their experience using 3D design and detail-
                                   ing tools. In some cases, however, no designer or subcontractor with 3D experi-
                                   ence that also had an excellent reputation was available. In these cases, it was
                                   necessary to convert 2D designs to 3D models by a third party. The project was a
                                   learning experience for all involved, regardless of prior background.
                                        The use of a virtual model facilitated and demanded close collaboration
                                   among the project team; and it resulted in the anticipated as well as some unex-
                                   pected benefits. Among the anticipated benefits were:




c09.indd 360                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:12 AM
                                              9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex              361

               Table 9-3-3 Goals for the integrated project team, established by owner’s project
               manager; additional specific goals are shown in Table 9-3-4 below.
                Lean Approach                                    Goals of Sutter Health Lean Project Delivery

                Subcontractors to be brought in early to     Better collaboration to improve constructability, reduce
                participate in detail design                 errors in field, save time and cost

                Target costing                               Better collaboration to reduce costs
                                                             Optimize the project, not the pieces

                Applying the Last Planner System™            Projects are networks of commitments

                Weekly work planning                         Tightly couple learning with action

                Work streams                                 Increase relatedness among all project participants

                Build virtually in 3D before constructing    Better collaboration using an accurate and complete
                                                             3D model; Optimize the project, not the pieces
                                                             Tightly couple learning with action




               Table 9-3-4       Design and Modeling responsibilities for each member of the project team
                Team Member                                 Scope of Work                                     Software Used

                Architect                        3D architectural model & documentation             Architectural Desktop (ADT)

                Parking Garage Designer          2D design & documentation                          2D AutoCAD
                                                 3D model built from 2D AutoCAD-built by            3D AutoCAD
                                                 consultant after design completed

                Structural Engineer              2D design & documentation                          Revit Structures
                                                 3D structural Model of 2D Design

                Mechanical Engineer              2D design & documentation                          2D AutoCAD

                Electrical Engineer              2D design & documentation                          2D AutoCAD

                HVAC Contractor                  3D shop drawings                                   CadDuct

                Plumbing Contractor              3D shop drawings                                   Piping Designer 3D

                Electrical Contractor            3D shop drawings                                   3D AutoCAD

                Fire Protection Contractor       3D shop drawings                                   SprinkCAD



                   • For the client: greater understanding of how the facility would serve
                     patients, doctors, and nurses
                   • For the designers: how design decisions would impact the facility, influence
                     its constructability and cost, and greatly reduce field conflicts and clashes




c09.indd 361                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:13 AM
          362 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                         • For the contractor and subcontractors: how the facility could be effi-
                                           ciently constructed and phased; how materials and offsite prefabricated
                                           assemblies could be installed

                                         Some of the realized benefits included:

                                         • All important design decisions were made during the design phase
                                         • No misunderstanding among project team
                                         • No conflict of systems in the field
                                         • Hospital administration, staff, and doctors could see and understand
                                           the spaces
                                         • Inform the community about proposed design
                                         • Better coordination of subcontractors onsite
                                         • Plan logistics and sequence installation of prefabricated assemblies

                                         To overlap design with construction, the subcontractors started detailing
                                     before the A/E firms completed their designs. This workflow is shown in
                                     Figure 9-3-4. This reduced the detail design effort normally required of A/E
                                     firms, which typically delays the start of detail design by subcontractors; and it
                                     allowed construction and prefab assembly to begin earlier. The planning of
                                     these detailing efforts proved to be critical. If the subcontractors began their
                                     work too early, then further changes requested by the client would inevitably
                                     lead to considerable rework and extra workloads. On the other hand, a late start
                                     would cause delays in construction and fabrication. To deal with this, an overall


          FIGURE 9-3-4
          Workflow of
          virtual design and
          construction (not to
          time scale) showing
          how the overlap
          of design and
          construction was
          organized.
          Note the early selection
          and participation of
          subcontractors in design
          assist roles. Foundation
          work began midway
          through the modeling
          and coordination effort.




c09.indd 362                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:13 AM
                                         9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex       363

                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-3-5
                                                                                                      Comparison of
                                                                                                      a) virtual 3D model
                                                                                                      to b) actual onsite
                                                                                                      assembly.
                                                                                                      Adapted from image
                                                                                                      provided courtesy of
                                                                                                      DPR Construction, Inc.




               schedule was developed to show when each sector of the project would be con-
               structed and when detailed design would be needed for each type of work within
               that sector, such as slabs, columns, sprinklers, HVAC, plumbing, electrical, etc.
               The 3D CAD model showed exactly how each object interacted with others and
               allowed for close collaboration among the various trades. Figure 9-3-5 shows
               how closely the 3D CAD model mirrored actual field assembly.
                    The schedule was carefully reviewed, and it guided the entire project. It
               was used to ‘pull’ the schedule for material deliveries, indicate when detailed
               design would be needed, and ensure sufficient lead time for field construction,
               prefabrication, and installation. The schedule also tracked the delivery of
               resources to keep construction continuous and on track. By and large, this
               planning system worked well. The only delays were caused by changes requested
               by the client and permit delays from the county or Hospital Regulatory Agency.
               In addition, not all subcontractors were involved early enough to collaborate
               during the detailed design phase. This necessitated some field changes, such as
               for the fixtures, furniture, and equipment (FF&E) subcontractor. Changes to
               the equipment requirements and locations caused associated changes in elec-
               trical, piping, and HVAC. Thus, despite very significant efforts to smooth the
               construction process and avoid delays in the field caused by design errors
               (clashes), there were some problems that required additional detailing work
               and some field delays. Nevertheless, the use of a shared 3D model linked to
               lean construction techniques led to reduced project cost and time.
                    In the following sections, we present the role of each participant, their indi-
               vidual contributions and provide detailed solutions to the problems encountered.


               9.3.3 Subcontractors
               The responsibilities of the GC included typical tasks, such as selecting subcon-
               tractors, planning and supervising the construction, coordinating the rest of the
               project team and outside agencies responsible for permits. Additionally for this
               project, they were responsible for setting up the computer environment for




c09.indd 363                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:44:14 AM
          364 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                      virtual design and coordinating the use of 3D modeling for planning, visualiza-
                                      tion, and clash detection. Working with the subcontractors, they also assisted
                                      in the ordering and installation of materials and fabricated assemblies.
                                           In selecting the design assist and design build subcontractors, the GC
                                      placed greater emphasis on the need for prior experience with 3D modeling
                                      systems. The instructions to bidders are shown in the box below.
                                           After each bidder was interviewed and pre-qualified, the most experienced
                                      bidder was selected. In almost all cases, they found an adequate number of



               Camino Medical Campus 3D Object Modeling Requirements
               Approach
               Sutter Health has asked DPR to lead the effort to coordinate detailed construction designs. Each
               Design Assist and Design Build contractor will be required to create a 3D object model of their
               design. These models will be brought together into a 3D CAD integration software application where
               they can be viewed and analyzed. Designers will be asked to revise their designs to resolve con-
               flicts. Each contractor will be responsible for the accuracy of their design, including any necessary
               revisions. After the changes have been made, the 3D model will be analyzed again in an iterative
               process. Contractor should plan to coordinate work with other trades, as they would normally, but
               also for the additional coordination effort based on 3D object models. Along with coordination, the
               3D object models will be linked to schedule activities so that the sequence can be analyzed using
               4D software. Installation sequences will be changed to create the best possible schedule.

               Object Modeling
               Detailed design will be done in CAD 3D object modeling software, which can create objects
               having the following characteristics:

               • Each object in the model has a unique name or object identifier, and can have attributes
                 attached to it, i.e., geometry info, weight, cost, schedule, procurement info, etc.
               • These objects are either 3D solids or true parametric objects. They are not 2D polygons that are
                 combined to create a 3D object, as is the case in a surface model.
               • The object model is assembled from libraries of predefined parts representing a constructible
                 component or assembly of components.
               • Object properties should reside in a database which can be queried for attributes of the various
                 objects.
               • All views of the model are depictions of the object properties stored in the database so that a change
                 made to one or more object parameters is reflected in every plan, section and elevation view.




c09.indd 364                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:44:15 AM
                                            9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex    365

                                                  Shared Server is the key!                           FIGURE 9-3-6
                                                                                                      Server and network
                                       Firewall                                                       setup for the project.
                                                          VPN firewall                                Note: internet access
                                   DPR's                                                              was through a firewall.
                                   server                                 Sub shared server with
                                                                                                      Image provided courtesy
                                                                          secure remote access
                                                                                                      of DPR Construction,
                                                                                                      Inc.
                                DPR's
                              computer                                   Designer's computer
                               network                                   network



               subcontractors with the required experience. In a few areas, it was necessary
               to accept less than the desired capability in 3D design. This resulted in a few
               problems later on, when the 2D designs caused problems (clashes) in the field.
               Among the most important lessons learned for this project was the importance
               of having all subcontractors input their designs into the shared 3D model.
                   Since a variety of 2D and 3D modeling systems were used, Navisworks
               JetStream software was used to merge the models and detect clashes. This
               technical setup is shown in Figure 9-3-6. The network was maintained at the
               job site with internet access through a firewall. The subcontractors shared
               the work for all detailing. This ensured excellent collaboration among the team
               and reduced the time needed to resolve problems.
                   So that subcontractors could work together easily, a set of standards was
               established for merging their individual efforts. These included:

                   • File naming
                   • Common scales
                   • Common reference point for all trades (0,0,0 point set by architect)
                   • Identification and colors used for objects
                   • Title blocks and view ports
                   • File formats compatible with Navisworks JetStream software

                   To establish a budget for the 3D modeling effort, each team member was
               assigned a scope of work. The budget was used to calculate the actual cost of
               3D modeling, beyond what it would have cost to produce only 2D drawings.
               The extra costs were caused by using a combination of 2D and 3D tools. Addi-
               tional effort was required to model objects that might otherwise not be shown
               in drawings, such as small pipes, pipe supports, and sheet metal supports, etc.
               The primary reason for the higher cost of detailing the piping was that design
               changes required rework. While this did add cost to the project, early detailing




c09.indd 365                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:44:15 AM
          366 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-3-7
          Picture of detailers in
          the shared workspace
          onsite.
          Image provided courtesy
          of DPR Construction,
          Inc.




                                    facilitated field progress and reduced the overall project duration. This is a
                                    good example of how added cost for one subcontractor led to a reduced cost
                                    for the total project. This did not give piping subcontractors a disadvantage
                                    because all of the subcontractors involved were able to benefit from the overall
                                    project savings (see below for contract details).
                                         Extra costs were as listed in Table 9-3-5.

                                    9.3.4 Owner
                                    Sutter Health and its subsidiaries are major owners of hospitals and medical
                                    office buildings in California and elsewhere. As such, they have considerable
                                    experience in the permitting, financing, and design and construction processes.
                                    In recent years, the pace of construction has increased significantly due to a
                                    recently enacted law in the state of California that requires seismic upgrading of
                                    all medical facilities. The pressure to upgrade and replace older facilities has
                                    resulted in increases in the cost of work and longer waiting periods for obtain-
                                    ing permits and undergoing reviews by the Office of State-wide Health Planning
                                    and Development (OSHPD) and other local regulatory agencies. Healthcare
                                    developers in general have been particularly eager to find more efficient
                                    approaches to the design and construction process. At the time of the project’s
                                    completion, the affiliates of Sutter Health had not attempted to implement the




c09.indd 366                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:44:16 AM
                                             9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex              367

               Table 9-3-5 The extra costs of modeling in 3D, as opposed to using 2D drawings, for each project
               member. The extra costs were considerably lower than the savings in time and labor hours.
                                                                                              Extra cost for       Percent of total
                Company/Function                         Modeling scope                         3D effort           modeling cost

                HPS/Architecture          Architectural design                                      $80,000             19.3%

                KPF                       Structural design; foundations and steel frame            $20,000               4.8%

                Watry Design              Parking structure shell                                   $15,000               3.6%

                Southland / Sheet         Add sheet metal supports and seismic bracing              $50,000             12.0%
                Metal Detailing           to 3D duct model from Mechanical Eng.
                                          Design; 3D detailing and coordination

                McClenahan / Piping       Add pipe, pipe supports, and seismic bracing             $200,0001            48.2%
                Detailing                 to coordinate with other trades; 3D detailing
                                          and coordination

                Northstar                 Fire sprinkler shop drawings and coordination    unable to report cost          0.0%

                Cupertino                 Electrical shop drawings and coordination                 $50,000             12.0%

                Total Modeling Cost                                                                $415,000            100.0%

                Total construction cost                                                        $94,500,000              0.44%




               3D model for use in facility management. As a result, design changes were only
               entered on as-built drawings and not to the 3D model.
                     The owner’s goals are summarized in Table 9-3-6. The last item in Table
               9-3-6 was supported in writing through the use of a unique clause in the con-
               tract for specifying how the cost savings achieved by any individual team mem-
               ber would be shared collectively by the team, including the owner.
                     This clause was an important factor for facilitating a successful collabora-
               tion, therefore it is described in further detail in the section that follows, which
               is a description of the Incentive Fee Plan developed by the owner specifically
               for this project.
                     The first section defines the goals and underlying principles of the plan.
               The remaining sections define the three financial pools created by this plan and
               how they were to be measured and distributed to the project participants.
                     Calculation of the amounts represented by the Cost of Work and Incentive
               Pools is too complex to describe here. In summary, these pools depended on the
               quality, safety, and timeliness of work performed. Performance was defined by a
               list of factors, with points assigned to each. Periodic evaluations were performed
               by the OAC team throughout the project. The owner required that each partici-
               pant submit a final report summarizing their performance (following an evalua-
               tion), which served as the basis for distributing payments from the two pools.




c09.indd 367                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:18 AM
          368 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          Table 9-3-6           The owner’s goals and how they were implemented.
               Owner Goal                                                                        Achieved by..

               Reduce the time for design and construction         increasing the overlap of these two functions, with earlier involvement of
                                                                   subcontractors for design assistance.

               Reduce the need for Office of State-wide Health     minimizing design changes after the start of construction,
               Planning and Development (OSHPD) reviews

               Reduce the cost of design and construction          using lean techniques; and eliminate design errors and field delays
                                                                   through the use of clash detection.

               Increase field productivity                         increasing off-site prefabrication; and improve collaborative planning
                                                                   with the support of a shared3D model.

               Increase project safety                             reducing the number of workers in the field; and rely on better task
                                                                   visualizations to anticipate potential safety problems.

               Improve collaboration among the project team        including incentive terms in the contract to ensure that the cost
                                                                   savingsachieved would be shared among all participants.




                Owner’s Incentive Fee Plan
                Underlying Principles
                  1. Maximize the creation of value from the owner’s perspective while minimizing waste.
                  2. Increase relatedness throughout the design and construction process. Approach each problem
                     with an attitude of inquiry by first asking “who might I ask to help solve this problem” and
                     then focusing jointly on exploring, rather than independently coming up with the solution.
                  3. Increase relatedness among the members of the design and construction team. Strangers
                     cannot be expected to deeply collaborate and achieve higher levels of performance.
                  4. Pursue coordination of work on the project by recognizing that a project is a network of
                     commitments. Work is to be coordinated through requests, promises, and ‘pull’ scheduling.
                     The goal of project management and planning is to articulate and activate this network of
                     commitments.
                  5. Constantly seek to maximize value at the project level, not at the individual or enterprise
                     level, by asking “how can I create coherence between the goals of individual team members
                     and the project as a whole?”
                  6. Approach each action with a commitment toward continuous improvement; if the team does
                     not ‘learn as it goes,’ the project will not benefit from these opportunities, for which the
                     project has paid.

                This description is taken from the Owner’s contract documents with some minor modifications in wording to clarify the text.




c09.indd 368                                                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:44:18 AM
                                        9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex       369


                 Creation of an Incentive Pool
                 The Incentive Pool has two funding sources: (1) savings in the cost of work; and (2) unexpended
                 contingency, both in the design and construction phases. The anticipated distribution is shown in
                 Figure 9-3-8 and described below.

                 Cost of the Work Savings Pool.
                 Sutter Health anticipates that major trade contractors – such as Southland Industries, J. W. McClenahan
                 Co., Cupertino Electric, and Northstar Fire Protection – will be performing work under subcontracts
                 to compensate for the Cost of Work plus fixed fee, each with a guaranteed maximum price. Similarly,
                 the self-performed trade work of DPR’s will also be performed on a Cost Plus Fixed Fee and guaran-
                 teed-max-price (GMP) basis. With full implementation of Lean Project Delivery and the Last Planner
                 System™ to control production, Sutter Health anticipates that reliable workflow and a better under-
                 standing of the satisfaction conditions will result in decreased labor and material costs and reduced
                 management expenses. As a result, if the actual Cost of Work – including contractual fee – is
                 less than the GMP for these identified trades, then 25% of the savings will be transferred to the
                 Trade Contractor Incentive Pool (TCIP), 25% to the Owner-Architect-Contractor Incentive Pool(OAC),
                 and the remaining 50% to the Owner Project Contingency (OPC). Distribution to the participating
                 trades – from the TCIP – is to be based on the relative size of each contract, as compared to the
                 overall value of the GMP trade contracts, to be reviewed and approved by the owner.

                 Contingency Preservation Pools.
                 The project budgets and design and construction contracts consider that the Design Contingency
                 (DC) and Construction Phase Contingency (CPC) are to be earmarked in the project budget and
                 available throughout the construction process to address cost overruns, either resulting from design
                 errors or omissions (DC) or extra work not otherwise entitling CM/GC to a change order (CPC).
                 Preservation of the DC and the CPC should be a by-product of well performed lean project delivery.
                 As a result, to the extent that the agreed upon DC and CPC are preserved, 50% of the savings –
                 together with the 25% savings from the Cost of Work – are to be transferred to the OAC Incentive
                 Pool, with the remainder going to the OPC. The OAC Incentive Pool is to be divided equally: with
                 50% paid to the Architect (with 40% paid to their sub-consultants); and 50% paid to the General
                 Contractor, (with 40% to their subcontractors). Distributions to sub-consultants and subcontractors
                 are to be reviewed and approved by the owner.




                    Over time and with experience, responses to this contract agreement
               proved to be mixed. As a practical matter, the provisions for calculating each
               of the pools were quite complex and difficult to implement in a timely manner.
               Because of this complexity, individual participants sometimes had difficulty




c09.indd 369                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:19 AM
          370 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-3-8
          Diagram showing                                                                   50% of CWSP
          how the Cost of Work                                                            returned to Owner
          savings pool and                                      Cost of                         (OPC)
                                  All GMP contractors            Work
          contingency pools       contribute to Cost of         Savings                                        25% of OAC Pool
          were distributed to      Work Savings Pool              Pool                                         returned to GMP
          the owner and project                                 (CWSP)      25% funds the                         Contractors
          team.                                                             Incentive Pool
                                                                                                               50% of Incentive
                                                                                                               Pool returned to
                                                50% of Remaining              Owner                            Architect (40% of
                                               Contingencies funds          Architect                          which returned to
                                                  Incentive Pool           Contractor                          sub-consultants)
                                                                           Pool (OAC)
                                                                          (x scoring %)
                                     Design Contingency                                                        50% of Incentive
                                         (DC) during                                                          Pool returned to GC
                                       construction &                                                            (40% of which
                                        Construction                                                            returned to sub
                                     Contingency during                                                           contractors)
                                     construction (CPC)                            50% of Remaining
                                                                                    Contingencies is
                                                                                   returned to Owner
                                                                                         (OPC)




                                  evaluating how their actions would influence the final results. At the time of
                                  this case study, the project was not yet complete and final allocations of these
                                  pools were not made. The owner is experimenting with other contract
                                  approaches for subsequent projects.

                                  9.3.5 General Contractor (GC)
                                  DPR was the GC and also self-performed some of the work, specifically the
                                  concrete and drywall. Their major responsibilities were to pre-qualify and
                                  select mechanical and electrical contractors; to coordinate the detailed design
                                  and construction process; to obtain necessary permits and inspections; and to
                                  ensure that cost, time, and safety goals were achieved or improved upon. The
                                  key tools for achieving these results were the use of lean construction methods;
                                  early participation of key subcontractors for design review and detailing of
                                  systems; extensive offsite fabrication; and use of an accurate 3D model for
                                  planning, clash detection, and correction.
                                       Productivity of the crew increased, on average, between 10% and 30% for
                                  the following reasons:

                                      • Components fit without the need for field modifications, with no
                                        Requests for Information (RFI) and only five field changes for MEP
                                        trades with bulk of work.
                                      • Less rework (only 41 out of 25,000 trade work hours).




c09.indd 370                                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:19 AM
                                        9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex   371

                   • Just-in-time delivery meant less cluttered site in the way and fewer hours
                     moving material from one place to another.
                   • Eliminated the rush to “get in first” to avoid clashes with other preced-
                     ing trades.
                   • Conflicts were limited to material storage and handling, not component
                     installations.
                   • Smaller crews were required to install prefabricated components in the
                     field (approximate 1/3 reduction).
                   • Less-skilled workers could be productive (both offsite and onsite).
                   • A safer job-site resulted in:
                     ❍   Reduced field hours and smaller crews.
                     ❍   Less improvisation and better planning.

                    Because of these benefits, the HVAC sub contractor (Southland) antici-
               pated a Cost of Work savings of $250K to $340K on a total contract amount
               of $8.4M, or about 3% to 4% of the total contract value.
                    A critical requirement for the GC was to coordinate the design process
               with a deep understanding of the interdependencies among various contrac-
               tors. To determine the last responsible moment for making a decision, these
               dependencies had to be understood clearly. For example, the structural fabrica-
               tor required information, such as weight and location, of mechanical equipment
               prior to sizing the roof members. Until these commitments were made, the
               structural members could not be sized. Due to the increase in dependency
               among the team, work had to be done in smaller batches to facilitate collabora-
               tion. This is an important deviation from the traditional process, where each
               design type is done independently and coordinated only when the work is near
               complete.
                    Another important revision in this work process was that more work had
               to be done by designers and subcontractors earlier than typically happens in
               the design-bid-build process. Building an accurate 3D model involves all trades
               and requires early participation by subcontractors, who would normally be
               involved after the start of construction. On this project, most of the major sub-
               contractors were involved early and contributed to the 3D model, which aided
               in the elimination of clashes and the coordination of planning sequences, etc.
               Their involvement also eliminated the usual need for re-drawing layouts during
               design and then again during layout planning. The designers and subcontrac-
               tors, however, did not all use 3D design tools. This led to deficiencies in
               the model and field problems that needed to be addressed. For example, the
               designer of the parking facility used 2D AutoCAD and – after the design was




c09.indd 371                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:44:19 AM
          372 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               complete – converted to 3D using Architectural Desktop. Because of the fast
                               track nature of the project, they did not have time (and the owner did not want
                               to pay for the extra cost) of portraying the sloping second-level deck. Instead,
                               flat slabs were shown for the garage and the model was inaccurate. This intro-
                               duced problems for the piping subcontractor during construction. Again, this
                               illustrates the importance of building an accurate and complete model for
                               design prior to construction.


                               9.3.6 Architect
                               Hawley Peterson and Snyder (HPS) served as the Project Architect and used
                               Architectural Desktop from Autodesk for modeling, visualization, and draw-
                               ing. They worked under a conventional contract until the General Contractor
                               (DPR) and key subcontractors were selected. At this point, the owner imple-
                               mented a new agreement based on a guaranteed maximum price (GMP)
                               together with the Incentive Fee Plan excerpted above. HPS was responsible for
                               producing a 3D object-based model containing the building’s architectural
                               components. The structural engineer (KPFF) was a subcontractor of HPS and
                               used Revit Structure and ETABS 3D to model and design the structural
                               components. Other participants, including engineering consultants and sub-
                               contractors, were responsible for their respective building systems, such as
                               electrical, fresh and waste water piping, fire safety piping and sprinklers, HVAC
                               systems, etc. Weekly meetings were held at the job-site to review progress and
                               analyze and correct perceived hard clashes using the 3D model. As the project
                               neared the construction phase, detailing of piping and other systems began
                               with the work being broken-up into packages that were coordinated with the
                               construction and installation schedule for the field.
                                    The level of detail needed for the model’s definition was determined early
                               in the project. The following items were ruled out of the model’s scope:

                                   • Connections between structural members
                                   • Furniture
                                   • Wall mounted equipment, fixtures, etc.
                                   • Trim, handrails, other misc. architectural elements

                                   After some experience using the model, however, additional objects were
                               added as needed, such as footings, to coordinate the subgrade utilities. As con-
                               struction progressed, it became clear that some objects lacked necessary details –
                               such as structural connections, handrails, and rainwater piping – and resulted in




c09.indd 372                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:44:20 AM
                                         9.3 Camino Medical Group Mountain View Medical Office Building Complex   373

               unanticipated clashes in the field. These required extra time and cost to correct.
               In fact, lack of detail in the model was the only source of field errors, making this
               a remarkable accomplishment for a project in which some participants had no
               prior experience using a collaborative 3D model.


               9.3.7 Electrical Subcontractor
               Cupertino Electric had some prior experience with 3D design detailing and
               used Pipe Designer 3D for the layout of rigid conduit runs and FabPro for the
               design of prefabricated assemblies. They fed their 3D models into JetStream
               software to perform clash detection. They were responsible for modeling feed-
               ers, the telecommunication cable tray and conduit, homerun conduits, branch
               power and lighting system j-hangers, distribution equipment, and light fixtures.
               Along with other subcontractors, they found that for clash detection, 3D mod-
               eling was far more accurate than overlaying 2D drawings on a light table. It
               also provided a much improved basis for collaboration. The extra cost of pro-
               ducing 2D drawings from the 3D model – for use in the field – was estimated
               at $50,000. This expense was more than compensated for by the more produc-
               tive use of field crew time, as a result of 3D task visualization and a reduction
               in clashes. The 3D model’s improved accuracy also allowed for the effective use
               of prefabricated wiring assemblies and contributed to a reduction in waste ma-
               terials. Smaller crews in the field led to a better safety record for all of the
               subcontractors that used prefabricated assemblies. The only problems encoun-
               tered stemmed from starting the 3D detailing before the design was sufficiently
               complete, which caused the need for additional effort when changes were
               requested by the client, such as changing the location of equipment or using
               equipment with different electrical requirements.


               9.3.8 Lessons Learned
               Lessons learned by the design-construction team:

                   • Begin planning with the 3D model at 50% design development; start
                     detailing only after 95% design development (to avoid rework).
                   • Make sure all trades use a 3D model for design, so that the merged
                     model is as accurate as possible; designing in 2D and then building a
                     3D model is a poor substitute for designing directly in 3D.
                   • Prepare and make a weekly design, coordination, and construction
                     schedule that links activities together based on install dates for the week
                     ahead; make sure “responsible individuals” from each trade attend every




c09.indd 373                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:20 AM
          374 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                           week, and that they are able to make commitments for their respective
                                           groups.
                                         • Do not change coordination sequencing during the course of work, i.e.,
                                           make commitments and stick to them.

                                     9.3.9 Conclusion
                                     This was a very successful project that started with a clear vision from the
                                     owner and excellent support from most of the project team. A genuine collabo-
                                     ration effort made it possible to overcome any lack of experience with 3D
                                     models and lean production planning. Not every participant had the skills,
                                     resources, and experience to fully participate in the project’s goals. As in most
                                     projects, it took some time for the team to learn how to collaborate effectively.
                                     There were some delays caused by inadequate detail and errors in the 3D
                                     model. The architect was experienced in using 3D modeling, but this was not
                                     the case for some of the other designers and engineers. Converting 2D models to
                                     3D – only after the design was complete – was the cause of most problems.
                                     There were owner-caused design changes that led to significant amounts of
                                     additional detailing effort, particularly for piping and electrical work. There
                                     were also ‘normal’ problems, caused by OSHPD and city permit delays. Despite
                                     all of these issues, the project was forecast to complete six months sooner than
                                     had originally been anticipated and under budget. Labor productivity was 15%
                                     to 30% above the industry standard. Crew sizes were smaller. Prefabricated
                                     assemblies were more extensive and more accurate than could have been
                                     achieved without the use of an accurate 3D model. Almost all project partici-
                                     pants felt that the overall collaboration effort and lean work processes were
                                     successful. The owner plans to continue to develop this process on future
                                     projects.



               Acknowledgments for El Camino Sutter Health Case Study
               The author is indebted to Dean Reed of DPR for his assistance in providing access to the project
               team for this case study. The access included personal interviews, presentation materials (some of
               which are used in this case study), and field inspections.




c09.indd 374                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:21 AM
                                                                                  9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   375

                    9.4 BEIJING NATIONAL AQUATICS CENTER
                            A unique building made possible by BIM for conceptual design
                            and structural engineering.

               9.4.1 Introduction
               The Beijing National Swimming Centre is being built for the 2008 Olympic
               Games. Often referred to as the ‘Water Cube’ (see Figure 9-4-1), the design
               was selected in an international design competition. The winning entry was
               submitted by the China State Construction and Engineering Corporation
               (CSCEC) together with Arup Consulting Engineers and PTW Architects. This
               case study addresses issues relevant to building information modeling (BIM),
               including new BIM innovations, the advantages and disadvantages encoun-
               tered by the team, how the team operated, and the lessons learned.
                    The Water Cube design concept is all about water. Water is deeply expressed
               in the building in its bubbly state. A remarkable duality is experienced in the
               building, where the detailing and micro-detailing of the building’s components
               achieve simplicity of form and monolithic monumentality. Water is also an
               important symbol for the people of Beijing, because it is a valuable resource
               and a treasure for such an inland city, and it is a sign of luxury in a person’s life.
               The building represents a paradise in the heart of the city that brings happiness
               and joy and all kinds of fantasies associated with the presence of water. The
               project associates water structurally and conceptually as a recurring theme
               together with the square, the primal shape of the house in Chinese tradition



                                                                                                         FIGURE 9-4-1
                                                                                                         A rendering of the
                                                                                                         Water Cube pavilion.
                                                                                                         Image courtesy of Arup,
                                                                                                         PTW and CSCEC.




c09.indd 375                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:44:21 AM
          376 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                    and mythology. The project expresses the personal experience of water-based
                                    leisure and sports and attempts to provide an appropriate airy and misty atmos-
                                    phere in an intentional setting that merges molecular science, architecture, and
                                    phenomenology.
                                         The building is located on the Olympic Green in Beijing, China, the home
                                    of the 2008 Olympic Games. It is situated across from the main stadium
                                    (designed by Herzog & De Meuron), creating a duality between water in the
                                    pavilion and fire in the main stadium (Figure 9-4-2).
                                         The building encompasses a gross floor area of 90,000 square meters
                                    (177  177 meters wide and 30 meters high). It contains five pools, including
                                    one—with a wave machine and rides—that is six times the size of an Olympic
                                    pool. There is also an organically shaped restaurant carved out of the bubble
                                    structure. The project holds seating for 17,000 spectators (6,000 permanent
                                    and 11,000 temporary). Events featured during the Olympic Games will be
                                    swimming, diving, water polo, and synchronized swimming. After the games,
                                    the pavilion will serve as one of Beijing’s premier recreation centers.
                                         To create the bubbly appearance, the building’s structure is covered in
                                    100,000 square meters of a modified copolymer called ethylene-tetra-fluoro-
                                    ethylene (ETFE), a tough recyclable material weighing just 1% of an equiva-
                                    lent sized glass panel, turning the building into an insulated greenhouse. Ninety
                                    percent of the solar energy that permeates the building gets trapped within the
                                    structural zone and is used to heat the pools and interior areas.


          FIGURE 9-4-2
          The Water Cube
          pavilion is located
          opposite the main
          stadium on the
          Olympic Green in
          Beijing, China.
          Image courtesy of Arup,
          PTW and CSCEC.




c09.indd 376                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:23 AM
                                                                                       9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   377

               Table 9-4-1     The project participants.
                Owner and operator:     People’s Government of Beijing Municipality, Beijing State-owned
                                        Assets Management Co. Ltd.

                Team leader:            China State Construction Engineering Corporation (CSCEC)
                                        (www.cscec.com.cn/english)

                Design partners:        Arup Consulting Engineers (www.arup.com), PTW Architects
                                        (www.ptw.com.au), and China State Construction International
                                        Design

                Engineers:              Arup Consulting Engineers and China State Construction
                                        International Design

                Contractor:             CSCEC

                Schematic design:       Arup and CSCEC Shenzhen Design Institute



                    Sustainability issues were a special concern in this project. The aim was to
               deliver a range of sustainable features while focusing on the building’s entire
               lifecycle and identifying its scope for continual improvement. Water conserva-
               tion and the design of efficient water conduit systems were especially important,
               given the high utilization levels, presence of pollutants, evapo-transpiration,
               and other unreliable climatic factors. Arup, through its SPeAR sustainability
               tool, proposed the reuse and recycling of 80% of the water harvested from roof
               catchments, pool backwash systems, and overland flows by incorporating water
               sensitive urban design principles. Reliance on the district’s local water and sew-
               age systems was thus reduced.
                    Arup is a global firm of designers, engineers, planners and business con-
               sultants providing a diverse range of professional services to clients around the
               world. The firm has over 7,000 staff in 75 offices in more than 33 countries.
                    Sydney-based firm PTW Architects (formerly known as Peddle Thorp and
               Walker) was established in 1889. PTW Architects currently employs over 150
               people. It maintains offices in Sydney as well as Beijing, Hanoi, and Shanghai.
               The firm works with staff around the world on various projects across the dis-
               ciplines of architecture, interior design, master planning, urban design and
               planning, and computer aided design, in addition to supporting staff adminis-
               tration, accountancy, IT, graphic design, marketing, and communications.
                    Established in 1982, CSCEC (China State Construction Engineering
               Corporation) is considered the largest construction enterprise and interna-
               tional contractor in China. It has been listed as one of the world’s top 225
               international contractors by ENR since 1984, ranking 16th in 2002. By the end
               of 2002, CSCEC had a total workforce of 122,500 people.




c09.indd 377                                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:44:23 AM
          378 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-4-3 Weaire
          and Phelan’s proposal
          for partitioning
          3D space.
          A) A cluster of repetitive
          units and B) the
          repetitive module of two
          dodecahedra and six
          14-sided cells. Images
          provided courtesy
          of Prof. Ken Brakke,
          Susquehanna University.




                                       9.4.2 Structural Concept
                                       The Water Cube’s structure is based on a unique lightweight construction tech-
                                       nique developed by PTW and CSCEC with Arup and derived from the struc-
                                       ture of water bubbles in the state of aggregation found in foam. Behind the
                                       seemingly random appearance of the facade is a strict geometry typically found
                                       in natural systems like crystals, cells, and other molecular structures. This
                                       arrangement, formulated by Weaire and Phelan (Weaire and Phelan 1994) and
                                       shown in Figure 9-4-3, is the most efficient subdivision of 3D space with
                                       equally sized cells. The transparency and apparent randomness is equally trans-
                                       posed into the inner and outer building-skins. A total number of 3,000
                                       pneumatic ETFE cushions restrained in aluminum extrusions are supported by
                                       a lightweight steel structure. The cushions are inflated with low-pressure air to
                                       provide insulation and resist wind loads.
                                            Unlike traditional stadium structures with gigantic columns and beams,
                                       cables and spans—to which the facade system is applied—the architectural
                                       space, structure and facade of the building are one and the same element. The
                                       wall cavity is 3.6 meters deep, and the cavity that forms the roof is 7.2 meters
                                       deep. The entire building contains more than 22,000 steel beam members and
                                       12,000 nodes, with approximately 6,500 tons of steel. This presented a chal-
                                       lenge of optimization, where every beam was supposed to be as small and as
                                       light as possible. As the roof usually consumes most of its strength in holding
                                       itself up, the need for optimization was extremely important, as self-weight is
                                       critical in long span roof structures.

                                       9.4.3 BIM in Design and Construction
                                       The project was designed in three distinct stages: preparation for the design
                                       competition including preparation of a physical model using rapid prototyping,




c09.indd 378                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:24 AM
                                                                                          9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   379

               design development, and preparation of tender documents. Structural analy-
               sis, design, and optimization continued throughout these process stages.
                    The pertinent BIM-related issues in this project were conceptual design,
               structural optimization, rapid prototyping, interoperability, and drawing produc-
               tion. The complexity and originality of the building meant that the design and the
               models representing it were constantly evolving and changing. By preparing and
               applying a variety of sophisticated add-on tools to standard BIM systems, the
               project team was able to achieve better optimization (structurally and function-
               ally), better analysis schemes, and to meet and sometimes beat short project
               schedules. The following paragraphs discuss some of the BIM-related design
               innovations in the Water Cube project.

               Competition Submission
               Geometry was still being defined at the competition stage, so the focus was on
               writing scripts (using Microstation VBA) that would skin a wire-frame to pro-
               vide a representative 3D solid model and help evaluate a potential wireframe
               model for other purposes. The 3D model created by the scripts consisted of
               members and node spheres of the same size, while some simple rules defined
               how to handle members of various lengths.
                    Full model exports to other modeling packages were only done during the
               competition stages for the purposes of visualization and rapid prototyping for
               the formal presentation. Arup developed a virtual reality walkthrough in a
               package called Arup Realtime, which uses game engine technology. This pack-
               age allows any 3D model or data from other sources, such as 2D drawings,
               sketches, and photographs, to be imported through a script into the virtual
               environment. The software allows modes of navigation via a keyboard, mouse,
               or joystick and a level of interaction that allows for customization by the antici-
               pated end user. This was a very time consuming process, involving exports via
               IGES format into Rhino and then into 3D Studio Max for generating AVI files,
               and it resulted in file sizes in excess of 1.2 GB. The data transfers are summa-
               rized in Figure 9-4-4.
                    Rapid prototyping was used to physically model the building’s complex
               structure with the goal of conveying the idea to the design competition’s jury,
               as was stated in the competition rules. It also provided a way for Arup to better
               understand the underlying concepts and elements. An STL file* was created
               from the 3D MicroStation model, and a physical model was built using that file
               through a stereo lithography (SLA) process, in which liquid epoxy resin is


               *STL (Standard Tessellation Language) is a file format defined for the stereo lithography CAD
               software created by 3D Systems of Valencia, CA, USA. STL files describe only the surface
               geometry of a 3D object.




c09.indd 379                                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:44:24 AM
          380 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-4-4
                                                        Microstation           *.IGES      Rhino
          Data transfers at the
          competition stage.

                                                                                          *.3DM
                                                         Microstation VBA

                                                                                        3D Studio
                                                      *.STL            *.DWG
                                                                                         *.AVI



                                    solidified by a computer-controlled UV laser beam according to the instruc-
                                    tions contained in the STL file. A robust semi-transparent 3D plastic model
                                    was produced; it is shown in Figure 9-4-5.
                                         Before Arup made progress with the design and VBA scripting, the Arup
                                    geometry was exported as a wire-frame model through DXF into the structural
                                    analysis package Strand 7.0, but only after CSCEC confirmed that this geome-
                                    try worked mathematically with a script using the Weaire and Phelan solution
                                    (Figure 9-4-3).

                                    Design Development
                                    In the design development stage, Arup used Strand 7.0 finite element analysis
                                    (FEA) software for structural analysis and optimization, going back and forth
                                    from the Microstation model. They developed VBA scripts to export the ana-
                                    lyzed and optimized model to AutoCAD drawing files (DWG format), Micro-
                                    station TriForma drawings (DGN), and Microsoft Excel spreadsheets (XLS)
                                    for data extraction.


          FIGURE 9-4-5
          Rapid prototype model
          of the Water Cube
          pavilion.
          Image courtesy of Arup,
          PTW and CSCEC.




c09.indd 380                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:44:25 AM
                                                                                   9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   381

                                                                                                          FIGURE 9-4-6
                                        Microstation                 Strand 7.0
                                                                                                          Data exchange during
                                                                                                          design development.

                                                                       DLLSD
                                     Microstation VBA
                                                                     (MDL-Based)



                                  *.DWG         *.DGN        *.XLS




                   The analysis data exported to Microstation included end points, section
               types, and coordinates and dimensions for section types (Figure 9-4-6). The
               scripts imported data files and then recreated wireframe models for integrity
               checks and final production purposes, with annotations of element number
               and section type. VBA scripts, called precompiled DLLSD (Microstation’s
               MDL-based 3D modeling routines), were used to create primitive 3D objects.
               All members were constructed in an element-aligned local coordinate system
               before being translated back into the global coordinate system.

               Tender Documentation
               The application of true structural elements was achieved by selecting specific
               section elements from the 3D wire-frame model and importing them from the
               analysis model. Part of the VBA script applied sectional information, beam
               reference, and property numbers to the wire-frame as invisible attributes, thus
               allowing search within Microstation for the required structural sections.
                    Following the information in the beam schedule, which had 37 different
               section properties, each section type was found via the Select by Attribute func-
               tion, which displayed all stick elements within the model that required a specific
               section-type attribute. Each stick was skinned with a Triforma structural ele-
               ment, giving a fully defined and structurally correct model.
                    Documentation and extraction of the relevant information was made easier
               using the Bentley Structural software package (a sample drawing is shown in Fig-
               ure 9-4-7). Huge libraries containing sections of steel members and their sizes
               were developed by the software. In addition, non-standard sections—in the case
               of fabricated rectangular, circular, and square hollow structural sections (RHS,
               CHS and SHS sections)—were added to text files and used within the structural
               model. Data extraction made these sections available in material list reports, pro-
               viding total length, weight, grades, and quantities for each section. The section
               files were set up as empty files containing every vertical, horizontal, and detail
               section location defined within each file. In this case, 112 sections were needed to
               appropriately document the entire project. Each section had a unique ID.




c09.indd 381                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:44:26 AM
          382 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-4-7
          A tender drawing
          produced from the
          3D model.
          Image courtesy of Arup,
          PTW and CSCEC.




                                         One of the many benefits of the Bentley Structural software package was
                                    reduced risk of human error, due to the extensive automation encountered in
                                    drawing production. Another important aspect was the ability to rebuild the
                                    model several times from scratch as the model and the structure were modi-
                                    fied. This quick and accurate method led to the generation of a completely new
                                    3D model from the structural analysis model. Eventually, extraction of all doc-
                                    umentation drawings, plans, sections, elevations, and details was easier to
                                    manage and update, as all 65 drawings were updated over one weekend. All
                                    the drawing sheets were set up in advance, each with a relevant pre-loaded ref-
                                    erence file. As soon as a section file was created, it automatically referenced
                                    into a drawing sheet, thus creating the documents.
                                         Microstation Structural Triforma has a function called Family and Parts,
                                    meaning there are several parts which include beams, columns, and purlins
                                    under the title Steel. This allowed for the unification of structural objects in the
                                    data extraction file and enabled all CHS, RHS, and SHS members to treat nodes
                                    as bounding elements, giving a true and accurate detail of the connections.

                                    Fabrication and Construction
                                    Arup proposed prefabrication to ease construction and limit expensive onsite
                                    welding. This idea, however, was rejected by the client in China, who preferred
                                    to use a large labor workforce and onsite welding. Figure 9-4-8 and Figure 9-4-9
                                    show the Water Cube pavilion under construction. Approximately 12,000 spher-
                                    ical nodes and 22,000 tube and box sections were individually fixed onsite. There
                                    were approximately 3,000 workers onsite including more than 100 welders.
                                         Tube and box section preparation was done manually at a fabrication plant
                                    from the cut length spreadsheets that Arup provided in its tender documents.
                                    This process is unique to China. In other countries, Arup’s technique would be
                                    to hand over the information in a format for continued use down the supply




c09.indd 382                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:26 AM
                                                                              9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   383

                                                                                                     FIGURE 9-4-8
                                                                                                     Construction of the
                                                                                                     Water Cube pavilion.
                                                                                                     Image courtesy of Ben
                                                                                                     McMillan and Arup.




                                                                                                     FIGURE 9-4-9
                                                                                                     Interior view of the
                                                                                                     Water Cube pavilion
                                                                                                     showing the steel
                                                                                                     structure nearing
                                                                                                     completion.
                                                                                                     Image courtesy Ben
                                                                                                     McMillan and Arup.




               chain, such as a Tekla Structures model in Steel Detailing Neutral Format
               (SDNF), to cut down fabrication time and enable the use of CNC machinery.
                   A very large number of part drawings were produced in this non-standard
               steel job because of the variety of complex connections. The number of part
               drawings Arup produced exceeded 15,000 drawing views (see Figure 9-4-7).
               These were required for fabrication on the shop floor, including all small items
               such as plates and stiffeners, which needed to be attached manually.




c09.indd 383                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:27 AM
          384 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               Project Management & Scheduling
                               Recognizing the short timelines and the complexity of their role, Arup relied
                               on internal specialist project managers to act as the focal points for all project
                               communication. This enabled the client to build a close working relationship
                               with its project managers and removed any ambiguity about information flows
                               or responsibility. The fast track design was delivered from competition stage
                               through to a full scheme design package in 10 weeks. The whole process, from
                               model to documentation, required a seven month design and documentation
                               period, which was split into three modeling blocks: competition, preliminary
                               design, and tender documentation. Structural design and optimization contin-
                               ued through this seven month period.
                                   The team mobilized and coordinated more than 80 Arup engineers and
                               specialists spread across 12 disciplines in four countries. Although elements of
                               design were being shared between Arup’s Sydney, Beijing, Hong Kong, and
                               London offices, coordination was centered in Sydney.
                                   Arup’s involvement on other high profile projects in Beijing, including the
                               Stadium, CCTV Tower, the international airport and interchange, also gave
                               the team an advantage. Two years prior to commencement of this project,
                               Arup completed the Shenzhen Aquatic Centre. The team was therefore famil-
                               iar with certain elements of the Chinese review process, such as the types of
                               questions they would be asked and who would review the work. This experi-
                               ence assisted greatly in a smooth transition.

                               Structural Optimization
                               The greatest challenges in the Water Cube project were associated with struc-
                               tural design and fabrication. The first was to optimize the overall weight of the
                               steel structure. The second was to fulfill the seismic design requirements stipu-
                               lated by the city of Beijing. Whether to use compact sections for roof design
                               that would behave plastically under seismic loads or stiffened slender sec-
                               tions that would behave elastically under such loads was a key issue.
                                    To overcome these and other challenges, Arup developed and implemented
                               a structural optimization program to perform all structural analysis, design, and
                               design optimization. Modeling of the complex structure was the fundamental
                               aspect, thus allowing continuous on-demand refinements and adjustments. The
                               process of nonstop alteration of designs to reach maximum optimization in
                               addition to correctly documenting the building with sophisticated components
                               was a significant factor in developing the optimization program.
                                    Optimization of the building involved determining member sizes for 22,000
                               beams to meet the requirements of 13 Chinese steel code strength equations at




c09.indd 384                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:44:37 AM
                                                                               9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   385

               five points on each beam for 190 load combinations. Thus, there are 22,000
               design variables and 22,000  13  5  190 = 271.7 million design constraints.
                    Gradient-based optimization methods were not possible due to the large
               number of constraints. Software was written from scratch to determine mini-
               mum sets of member sizes for 22,000 beams. A damped constraint satisfaction
               method was adopted to find three sets of well-graded discrete member cross
               section choices. Methods used to assess each set included simulated annealing,
               plastic versus elastic stiffener design, and engineering judgment.
                    The optimization code was written in Visual Basic 6.0. The VB software
               controlled the entire optimization process. Structural analysis was performed
               using Strand7 Finite Element Software, and its API was used to interface with
               the VB code.

               9.4.4 Lessons Learned
               The Water Cube pavilion is a unique project. The ongoing processes of informa-
               tion exchange, interoperability, optimization, and building information modeling
               added great value to the project. The positive impacts of BIM were enhanced
               modeling time and speed resulting in shorter schedules and a very short design
               response cycle time. It proved possible to rebuild the 3D fabrication model
               based on weekly structural analyses and sometimes even daily, updating all
               related information in a seamless process as the design was optimized. Issues of
               sustainability, building performance, fire protection, and safety were effectively
               resolved. Up-to-date tender documentation was easily extracted from the full
               design model; and reductions in human error were a significant plus.
                    It was only in the early competition stage that full model exports to other
               modeling packages were executed, for the purposes of animation and presenta-
               tion. It was then realized that this process, which involved exports via IGES
               format into Rhino and then Studio Max, was very time consuming; and it cre-
               ated large files that were difficult to handle. In the post-competition stage,
               where construction documentation was required, Arup had to decide how to
               coordinate the analytical and fabrication model information sets. This was
               done by linking the analytical software to the CAD software via a script. This
               was significant, as within this structure any member change would ripple
               throughout the structure affecting all elements around the base. Due to the
               sheer number of potential changes during the design stage, the script exported
               an entirely new model every day for re-documentation purposes.
                    Arup developed the conversion program to run from inside its CAD pack-
               age to ensure that all elements and procedures operated in the structure opti-
               mization and analysis program were properly imported and translated into the




c09.indd 385                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:37 AM
          386 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               detailed design model. This conversion program had numerous advantages,
                               the most important of which were:

                                   • Full design model. All plans, sections, elevations, details, and final
                                     documentation drawings were easily extracted from the fully coordi-
                                     nated 3D model, which contained all necessary information and design
                                     elements.
                                   • Reduced modeling time with greater speed. The entire steel structure
                                     and building was modeled in only 25 minutes. If modeled manually, it
                                     would have taken weeks or months.
                                   • Improved visualization. With the physical model in hand, 3D wire-
                                     frame models were developed and saved to 3D AutoCAD, allowing
                                     the client and contractors to easily visualize the project’s details with
                                     corresponding embedded information.

                                    The main disadvantage in this project was the lack of complete and inte-
                               grated coordination between the design development and the construction
                               phases. The complex computerized design, analysis, and optimization processes
                               were followed by a manually coordinated fabrication and construction process,
                               which is unexpected for a project of such complexity. The use of labor-intensive
                               construction methods and onsite welding prevented a streamlined fabrication
                               approach, in which automated CNC machinery would have been used.
                                    Better use could have been made of the model-based coordination between
                               the architect and engineering firm. A key lesson learned was the importance of
                               architectural priorities in projects of this sort, as bulky cross sections, thick
                               walls and roofs, and focusing on building performance issues alone can all
                               adversely affect the aesthetic, functional, and spatial qualities of a project.
                                    Previous collaboration between all team members and their expertise and
                               experience with Olympic projects helped the team succeed. Arup’s wide rang-
                               ing involvement in Beijing projects, including earlier ones related to the 2008
                               Olympic Games such as the National Stadium, Convention Center, and airport
                               terminals, created a clear understanding and familiarity of the workflow and
                               processes for dealing with authorities, design codes, and relevant matters. Many
                               of these projects were in collaboration with CSCEC, thus creating a mutual
                               understanding between the two firms. PTW is highly regarded for its major
                               civic projects and large-scale sports facilities, including involvement in the
                               International Athletics Centre and the Aquatic Centre for the 2000 Sydney
                               Games. Its strong and existing relationships with the Chinese partners played a
                               pivotal and significant role in the development process of the Water Cube. Arup
                               and PTW had also collaborated previously on a number of projects including




c09.indd 386                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:44:37 AM
                                                                              9.4 Beijing National Aquatics Center   387

               other venues for the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games, which established an easier
               mutual partnership. These factors eased collaboration during the project’s
               design and execution and had a positive impact on the design duration.
                     One of Arup’s important observations about the project was related to the
               implemented software. They pointed out the importance of Bentley’s software.
               Arup Senior 3D Modeler Stuart Bull explained: “Bentley Structural’s capabili-
               ties, such as automatic drawing extraction, dramatically reduced the time
               needed to produce 2D documentation. Since we didn’t have to worry about
               that part of our workload, we could focus on the 3D model. Using a MicroSta-
               tion VBA routine to automatically model the structure saved us quite a bit
               of time. Also, being able to save files in other formats let us quickly issue
               drawings to clients and consultants in the formats they needed. Yet, we didn’t
               have to give up the enhanced capabilities that Bentley solutions offered us.
               That was quite important. If we had been using any other software package,
               it’s unlikely that we could have produced such complicated geometry and doc-
               umentation and integrated it with structural analysis, especially in the time
               frame available.”
                     Another observation made by Bull concerned Arup’s software innovation
               and its developed scripts, which facilitated data exchange between the inte-
               grated model and analysis packages: “The ability to use the VBA scripts to cre-
               ate our geometry, which gave us the link from the engineering and analysis
               model to our working 3D CAD model, was very important. In terms of a con-
               sultant’s model, we provided everything we could downstream to our client,
               detailer/fabricator, and facade contractor. It could have been more BIM-enabled
               if the architect had contributed to the model and we passed the model back and
               forth; but in terms of what a BIM model should be, we probably weren’t that
               close. It must be remembered that this project was done nearly three years ago
               and still is a cutting edge 3D analysis/CAD project that most newer programs
               like Revit would still not be able to cope with.”
                     It was clear, however, that coordination of the model’s information
               exchange between Arup and PTW was lacking. More effort was needed to
               achieve a fully-integrated building model at the early stages of information
               exchange. More importantly, at the later stages of fabrication and construction,
               most of the fabrication information produced by the complex model was not
               fully utilized. Manual execution of construction processes, onsite welding, and
               the preference for labor-intensive fabrication over the use of automatic CNC
               machinery all reduced the value of the exported model information. The Excel
               spreadsheet information was used to manually fabricate cross sections and
               operate them, instead of using the 3D information for direct operation of the
               fabricated products.




c09.indd 387                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:38 AM
          388 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                     9.4.5 Conclusion
                                     The use of BIM in this project related to structural optimization, information
                                     exchange software, and interoperability. Innovations included rapid prototyp-
                                     ing, visualization, and treatment of building performance issues, such as sus-
                                     tainability and fire protection. The factor that added most value, however,
                                     was the constant modeling of the evolving and changing complex structure
                                     achieved through structural optimization. Many useful outputs were achieved,
                                     such as optimized structural members with low steel tonnage and high strength,
                                     easy data extraction from the full design model, enhanced modeling time and
                                     speed, automatic referencing, rapid preparation of updated tender documenta-
                                     tion, easy model rebuilding, and reduced human error in drawing production.
                                     All of these helped reduce ambiguity, leading to optimized design and con-
                                     struction results. This type of project would not have been possible without
                                     sophisticated computer tools for structural analysis and fabrication detailing.



               Acknowledgments for Beijing Aquatics Center Case Study
               This case study was originally prepared by Sherif Morad Abdelmohsen for Professor Chuck
               Eastman in a course offered in the College of Architecture Ph.D. Program at the Georgia Institute of
               Technology, Winter 2006. It has been adapted for use in this book. The authors wish to acknowl-
               edge and thank the members of the Arup, PTW, and CSCEC teams, whose contributions were
               essential to this case study. The insight offered by Stuart Bull of Arup was particularly helpful.




                                           9.5 SAN FRANCISCO FEDERAL BUILDING
                                                  A study in energy efficient design with support from BIM

                                     9.5.1 Introduction
                                     The San Francisco Federal Building (SFFB) is located near the city’s Civic Center
                                     on a 3-acre site across the street from the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals Fed-
                                     eral Courthouse Building, built in 1905. Architectural firm Morphosis served as
                                     the design architect for the SFFB. The building reflects the U.S. General Serv-
                                     ices Administration’s (GSA) commitment to design excellence and sustainable
                                     architecture. The design goals established by the GSA included a commitment
                                     to sustainable living and a reduction in the consumption of resources, by mini-
                                     mizing waste materials and creating healthy and productive working conditions.
                                     The building enhances the surrounding area by introducing new amenities and
                                     public spaces.




c09.indd 388                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:38 AM
                                                                                   9.5 San Francisco Federal Building   389

                     Figure 9-5-1 is a digital simulation of the building in its San Francisco
               setting. This study describes the salient aspects of the building’s design and engi-
               neering and the software and procedures used during design and construction.
               It is an early example of Building Information Modeling. It was designed in the
               2001-2004 timeframe and built shortly after. The character of the building’s
               mechanical aesthetic can be seen in Figure 9-5-2.

               9.5.2 Description of Building Program
               The Federal Building consists of an 18-story (605,000 SF) office tower, a four-
               story annex building (118,511 SF) projecting from the tower, and a 47-space
               parking structure (19,244 SF) at the lowest level. In addition, there is a cafeteria
               (3,196 SF).


                                                                                                        FIGURE 9-5-1
                                                                                                        Simulated picture of SF
                                                                                                        Federal Building.
                                                                                                        Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                        of Morphosis.




c09.indd 389                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:44:38 AM
          390 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-5-2
          Facade of the SF
          Federal Building,
          as viewed from the
          childcare play yard.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Morphosis.




                                    9.5.3 Participants
                                    The building complex is divided into several components, with the main com-
                                    ponent being an 18-story tower, placed along the site’s Northwest boundary
                                    that includes offices for the US. Department of Health and Human Services
                                    and the Department of Agriculture, as well as conference rooms, fitness facili-
                                    ties, and a child care center. All will be open for use by the general public (see
                                    Figure 9-5-3).
                                         Perpendicular to the tower is a four-story annex with spaces for the Depart-
                                    ment of Labor and the Social Security Administration, with certain areas and
                                    services open to the public. A plaza space will be built for hosting concerts or
                                    an informal market that, in addition, features a cafeteria. This tower houses
                                    1,700 workers.

                                    9.5.4 Fresh Air and Natural Ventilation
                                    “With only five percent of the world’s population, the United States consumes
                                    25 percent of the world’s energy. The ongoing challenges of resource management




c09.indd 390                                                                                                       1/16/08 11:44:41 AM
                                                                                 9.5 San Francisco Federal Building   391

                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-5-3
                                                                                                      Diagram showing
                                                                                                      public spaces included
                                                                                                      in the design (volumes
                                                                                                      identified in gray).
                                                                                                      Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                      of Morphosis.




               demand that architects confront the ethics of ecology and the politics of energy.
               The design for the San Francisco Federal Building recognizes these challenges
               and poses a solution.”—Thom Mayne, Principal, Morphosis.
                    The design team envisioned a solution capable of substantially reducing
               resource consumption primarily through the use of natural ventilation. Such a
               proposal was possible due to the site’s prevailing Northwest winds and average
               temperature range of 44˚ to 78˚ Fahrenheit (7˚ to 18˚ Celsius). Morphosis
               designed a narrow but tall structure capable of admitting plenty of natural
               light. They also proposed a unique cooling system based on the interaction of
               three design features: operable windows, thermal mass, and cross ventilation.
                    The cooling system is managed by an automated system that senses the
               pressure of the prevailing winds and reacts by opening and closing windows to
               permit or restrict airflow into the building. Users maintain some level of control




c09.indd 391                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:44:42 AM
               Table 9-5-1        List of participants in the design and construction of SF Federal
               Building.
                Design Functions                                               Participant

                Project                               San Francisco Federal Building

                Client                                General Services Administration

                Architect                             Morphosis, Santa Monica

                Executive Architect                   Smith Group, San Francisco

                Structural, Mechanical, Electrical,   Ove Arup and Partners
                and Plumbing Engineers

                Natural Ventilation Modeling          Natural Works, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

                Landscape Architect                   Richard Haag Associates inc. with J.J.R

                Civil Engineer                        Brian Kangas Folk Company

                Geotechnical                          Geomatrix

                Lighting Consultant                   Horton Lees Brogden Lighting Design, inc

                Curtain Wall                          Curtain Wall Design & Consulting, inc.

                Signage                               Kate Keating Associates

                Collaborative Artists                 James Turrell, Ed Ruscha, Rupert Garcia, Hung Liu,
                                                      Raymond Sanders, William Wiley

                Blast Consultant                      Hinman Consulting Engineers

                Building Code Consultant              Rolf Jensen & Associates

                Acoustics                             Thornburn Associates

                Vertical Transportation               Hesselberg, Keesee & Associates, Inc.

                Cost Estimator                        Davis Langdon Adamson

                Construction Functions                                         Participant

                General Contractor                    Dick Corporation-Morganti Joint Venture

                Construction Manager                  Hunt Construction

                Steel detailers                       B.D.S. Steel Detailers

                Miscellaneous metals                  T. & M. Manufacturing

                Cladding                              Permasteelisa Cladding Technologies


               by manually adjusting the operable windows. The automated system evaluates
               building performance by taking into account users’ interactions, automated
               window settings, and the thermal mass of the concrete columns and slabs.
                   The building’s Southeast facade – the side that faces the afternoon sun and
               absorbs more heat – has a perforated metal sun-screen to mitigate heat gain. The
               building’s Northwest facade has a series of translucent sunshades to inhibit




c09.indd 392                                                                                               1/16/08 11:44:43 AM
                                                                                   9.5 San Francisco Federal Building    393

               the glare caused by the curtain wall’s glazed surfaces. These energy control
               concepts were developed collaboratively by Morphosis and Arup.
                    Given the complexity of the building’s design, it was important to develop
               an accurate digital building model that could be used for simulation analyses.
               This required the input of environmental data, including wind pressure on
               both sides of the building and outdoor and indoor air temperatures.
                    For both the computational fluid dynamics analysis and the definition of the
               Building Automated System (BAS), each floor of the building was divided into two
               symmetrical sides, with each area divided into five slices. The dark gray square in
               the center of Figure 9-5-4 is an elevator/service core that partitions the building.
                    Figure 9-5-5 shows a side-view of the velocity field (m/s) in the NW and
               SW wings, with all operable windows open. In the upper figure, air is able to
               flow above the meeting rooms. In the lower figure, the obstructive effects of
               the service core causes air to re-circulate around the building’s core.
                    Designs such as this one benefit greatly from the use of computer-simulated
               engineering analyses. To validate the effects of the proposed design, GSA asked


                                                                                                        FIGURE 9-5-4
                                                                                                        Plan view showing
                                                                                                        how each floor was
                                                                                                        modeled for thermal
                                                                                                        analysis (Carrilho da
                                                                                                        Graca et al. 2004).




                                                                                                        FIGURE 9-5-5 Output
                                                                                                        from the thermal
                                                                                                        simulation model: an
                                                                                                        elevation view of air
                                                                                                        flow for the building’s
                                                                                                        two symmetrical sides,
                                                                                                        with the NW facade
                                                                                                        shown on top and the
                                                                                                        SW below (see color
                                                                                                        insert for full color
                                                                                                        figure).
                                                                                                        Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                        of Natural Works.




c09.indd 393                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:44:43 AM
          394 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                    the UC San Diego Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (http://eetd.lbl.gov/
                                    r-bldgsee.html) and NaturalWorks (http://www.natural-works.com/naturalworks/
                                    hvacdesign.php) to serve as advisors to the project and carry out substantiating
                                    simulations. NaturalWorks undertook the analysis of the cross ventilation system.
                                    This required definition of the window geometry, opening areas, and specification
                                    of the Building Automated System (BAS) control rules. The model predicted air
                                    flow patterns, maximum air flow velocities, air exchange rates, and temperature
                                    profiles for different environmental conditions. The level of detail provided by
                                    these digital simulations assessed and verified the proposed design. This level of
                                    expert analysis provided the design team and client with a high level of confidence
                                    in the system’s performance before it was built. This building was intended as a
                                    prototype for showing how – by harnessing natural ventilation – buildings could
                                    be designed with better working environments and energy savings.
                                         Controls for the operable windows represented a crucial aspect of the
                                    design. EnergyPlus was coupled with a routine to calculate the effects of differ-
                                    ent control strategies and to design the modes for the building’s systems. A test
                                    run of EnergyPlus is shown in Figure 9-5-6.
                                         Cross ventilation (CV) is a common feature of many naturally ventilated
                                    buildings, with air flowing through windows, open doorways, and large inter-
                                    nal apertures and across the building’s rooms and corridors. Displacement
                                    ventilation (DV) is characterized by the supply of cool air at low elevation lev-
                                    els and the extraction of warm air at high elevation levels.
                                         Simplified airflow models were developed using a combination of scaled
                                    model experiments, computational fluid dynamics (CFD), and scaling analysis.


          FIGURE 9-5-6
          Results of an
          EnergyPlus simulation
          of a single zone office
          building using the new
          UCSD displacement
          ventilation model.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Lawrence Berkeley
          Laboratories.




c09.indd 394                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:44 AM
                                                                                           9.5 San Francisco Federal Building   395

                  EnergyPlus and Energy Plus Extensions Description

                  EnergyPlus was developed as a collaborative effort between Lawrence Berkeley National
                  Laboratory’s Simulation Research Group, led by Fred Winkelmann of the Environmental Energy
                  Technologies Division, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the U.S. Army
                  Construction Engineering Research Laboratory, with assistance from other research organizations.
                  The recently developed EnergyPlus Displacement (DV) and Cross-Ventilation (CV) models were
                  implemented by NaturalWorks. The new models resulted from research funded by the California
                  Energy Commission (CEC), done at the University of California at San Diego (UCSD). The project
                  was part of a large research effort in Low Energy Cooling systems, coordinated by Lawrence
                  Berkeley National Laboratories (Dr. Philip Haves).



               This combined approach provided insight into the mechanisms and system
               parameters needed to control the airflow pattern and vertical temperature vari-
               ations (Linden and Carrilho da Graca 2002).

               9.5.5 Uses of BIM Tools
               The use of three-dimensional parametric modeling and interoperability fell into
               four basic areas; architectural design, architectural detailing, structural design,
               and CFD simulation. Each operation was performed by a different company. At
               the time that these aspects were developed, software was not yet available to
               support the integration needed for collaborative work by Morphosis and Arup,
               their engineering advisors.
                   The use of BIM tools, however, did allow the designers to identify and
               solve problems at an earlier stage in the detailing process than would normally
               occur, allowing them to correct certain problems prior to construction. This
               helped keep the project on budget despite its complex design.

               9.5.6 Use of Building Modeling Tools for Architectural
                     Development
               Morphosis is a longtime user of FormZ for early stage design. Likewise, SFFB’s
               architectural model and renderings were developed in this application*. Later
               in the project, the collaborative team developed a more detailed model, and



               *In the future, Morphosis intends to use Bentley’s Generative Components (GC), which is

               capable of both generating and visually showing the design components as well as abstract
               relationships between them. (An example of GC can be found in Chapter 2, Figure 2-7.) This
               capability allows GC to capture and communicate the logic behind the geometry.




c09.indd 395                                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:44:45 AM
          396 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                    Morphosis turned to Bentley Triforma to detail the steel members and describe the
                                    complex geometry. As the design developed, steel members were added or modi-
                                    fied in both the Triforma and FormZ models. While it was possible to reliably
                                    exchange geometry between the two systems, it was not possible to exchange
                                    objects and attributes. When the architects desired to design from a purely
                                    geometric point-of-view, they reverted back to FormZ. Snapshots of the Triforma
                                    model are shown in Figures 9-5-7 and 9-5-9.
                                         The Triforma model evolved to become the project’s primary data repository.
                                    Three-dimensional models from other contractors and the data that these con-
                                    tained were imported into the Triforma model. The steel frame that covers the
                                    Southwest facade was developed by BDS using Tekla XSteel (now called Tekla
                                    Structures) (see Figure 9-5-8). Concurrently, Permasteelisa handled the detailing
                                    of the panels in AutoCAD (see Figure 9-5-10).
                                         At this point, the project was being modeled using three different tools,
                                    with the architectural model constructed in Triforma, the steel structure mod-
                                    eled in Tekla XSteel, and the definition of metal facade panels in AutoCAD.
                                         Data consistency problems may arise when using complex geometry, such as
                                    that developed for SFFB. The use of 2D drawings for the metal sunscreen cladding
                                    by Permasteelisa required close coordination, particularly for the warped surfaces.
                                    An example of an alignment review is shown in Figures 9-5-9. and 9-5-10. Aligned
                                    surfaces take on a dappled pattern as a result of round-off errors in visibility
                                    calculation. Morphosis provided the geometry control points, which facilitated the


          FIGURE 9-5-7
          Triforma model
          with the metal skin
          highlighted.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Morphosis.




c09.indd 396                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:45 AM
                                                                            9.5 San Francisco Federal Building   397

                                                                                                 FIGURE 9-5-8
                                                                                                 Tekla XSteel model of
                                                                                                 the steel structure.
                                                                                                 Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                 of BDS.




                                                                                                 FIGURE 9-5-9
                                                                                                 A detail of the metal
                                                                                                 skin panels shown in
                                                                                                 Figure 9-5-7, showing
                                                                                                 the verification of
                                                                                                 geometric consistency
                                                                                                 between the Triforma
                                                                                                 and the AutoCAD
                                                                                                 models.
                                                                                                 Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                 of Morphosis and BDS.




               proper alignment of each model. Two-dimensional drawings were generated from
               the Triforma model to provide definition of the concrete structure.
                   The exchange of information between Morphosis (using Microstation
               Triforma) and BDS (using Tekla XSteel) was extremely successful. No problems




c09.indd 397                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:44:48 AM
          398 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-5-10
          Verification of
          geometric consistency
          for the steel structure
          using the Triforma,
          XSteel, and AutoCAD
          models.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Morphosis, BDS,
          Permasteelisa.




                                    were reported. Integration between the two applications using the Structural
                                    Design Neutral File (a precursor to CIS/2) data exchange format was very
                                    accurate.
                                        By combining all models in Triforma, Morphosis was able to check for vis-
                                    ual conflicts and alignment, allowing them to verify the accuracy of informa-
                                    tion coming from the detailers and fix errors before approving the information
                                    to generate shop drawings.
                                        Exchanges among the team doing the CFD simulations were generated
                                    through the use of 2D drawings. Information was restricted to the building’s
                                    representative vertical sections. Analyzing air flow within the building required
                                    abstraction of building geometry that could not be generated automatically.

                                    9.5.7 How the Design Was Affected by Natural Ventilation
                                    Because this is a federal building, GSA requires there to be a ‘hard,’ i.e., impen-
                                    etrable, perimeter at the base. The outside air intakes for the building had to
                                    be kept inaccessible to the public, and the structure had to be designed for
                                    blast-resistance. Despite the appeal of a building capable of opening up in
                                    response to internal and external environmental conditions, security concerns
                                    mandated that the lower and more vulnerable floors remain completely sealed.
                                    This required full air conditioning for the first five floors, while floors 6 through
                                    18 could take advantage of natural ventilation.
                                        According to the California Energy Code, interiors are only considered
                                    naturally ventilated if every unit is within 20 feet of an operable element. The
                                    structural core of this particular type of building must be approximately 20 feet




c09.indd 398                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:52 AM
                                                                                    9.5 San Francisco Federal Building   399

               from the outer skin. These two requirements necessitated the use of two natu-
               ral ventilation zones running along the Northwest and Southeast facades, while
               service areas, conference rooms, and private offices requiring continual
               mechanical ventilation were to be located within 20 feet of the exterior. An
               enclosed spine contains the mechanical ventilation equipment, so that it does
               not interfere with the conditions of the areas that feature natural ventilation.
               The spine’s height was restricted to 9.2 feet (2.8 m), leaving a minimum gap of
               1.0 foot (0.3 m) between the lower surface of the upper level slab, to provide
               space for air flow generated by the natural ventilation system.
                    Since the building’s concept was to replace mechanical ventilation with
               natural ventilation wherever possible, the surfaces of the concrete structure
               were left exposed to take advantage of their thermal mass properties. Concrete
               either traps or releases thermal energy, depending on environmental condi-
               tions, thereby acting as a temperature equalizer.
                    The Building Automated System (BAS) actively captures solar energy for
               use during colder periods to warm the concrete slabs, if the release of stored
               energy is not desired. Night cooling of the concrete ceiling slab is performed
               during warmer months, when previous day temperatures reach 75˚F (24˚C) or
               higher between the hours of 11 AM and 4 PM. When night cooling is indicated
               by the temperature control routine, the ventilation system uses the maximum
               allowed opening until slab temperatures fall below 66˚F (19˚C) or until early
               morning the following day (7 AM).
                    At the national level, GSA strives to limit annual energy consumption to
               55,000 BTU per sf. Consumption for the San Francisco Federal Building’s
               naturally ventilated floors is estimated to be less than 25,000 BTU per sf. If
               these projections are accurate, the sustainable design will translate to a tax-
               payer savings of approximately $250,000 annually (about $2 per sf per year).
                    In the future, the design team would like to integrate weather prediction data
               into the control system, basing the decision to initiate night cooling on antici-
               pated weather patterns for the following day, by combining this data with that of
               interior heat accumulation during the previous day.
                    The SFFB’s system is an example of integrating structural and mechanical
               engineering to achieve natural ventilation. The structural model of the con-
               crete employs a non-standard up-stand beam, where each beam sits above the
               slab it supports, rather than below it. A photo of an early full-sized model is
               shown in Figure 9-5-11. These up-stand beams allow for smooth air flow, with
               no obstructions on the underside of each slab during overnight pre-cooling
               periods to reduce the thermal mass load. A simulation of this airflow pattern is
               shown in Figure 9-5-12. This structural system also allows for better penetra-
               tion of sunlight into the interior. Due to the 13 foot ceilings, it is estimated that




c09.indd 399                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:44:54 AM
          400 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-5-11
          Physical model of
          the slab showing
          the sinusoidal lower
          surface.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Arup.




                                    approximately 85% of the office will be illuminated using natural light. Lastly,
                                    this structural system allowed for the possibility of creating an under floor ple-
                                    num for routing communication and electrical lines. And the plenum space
                                    provided additional under-floor air distribution for those offices that could not
                                    permit natural ventilation.
                                         The lower plane of each concrete slab, which remains exposed to the inte-
                                    rior level below it, was designed using a sinusoidal shape to increase the area of
                                    exposed concrete and improve its thermal mass exchange properties, as com-
                                    pared to traditional flat slabs. The sinusoidal waves are oriented parallel to the
                                    prevailing wind direction and help conduct cross-ventilation across the build-
                                    ing’s entire width (McConahey et al. 2002).
                                         Another design consideration that supported natural cross-ventilation had
                                    to do with the location of the furniture in the offices located near the core of the
                                    building. Workstations near the building’s perimeter were specified with a
                                    height of 4’-4”, to allow natural light to reach the interior core. Their surfaces
                                    were specified with perforated metal to allow maximum air flow over and
                                    through them.
                                         Definition of the operable windows was also affected by natural ventila-
                                    tion. CFD simulations were performed to test the viability of this concept.
                                    Windows were to be operated manually but also by the Building Automated




c09.indd 400                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:44:54 AM
                                                                                9.5 San Francisco Federal Building   401

                                                                                                     FIGURE 9-5-12
                                                                                                     CFD simulation,
                                                                                                     showing the behavior
                                                                                                     of the air flow when
                                                                                                     in contact with the
                                                                                                     sinusoidal surface (see
                                                                                                     color insert for full
                                                                                                     color figure).
                                                                                                     Image provided courtesy
                                                                                                     of Natural Works.




               System (BAS). Two strips of BAS-controlled windows were located just below
               the user-controlled window (Trickle vent) and 7.2’ (2.2 m) above it.
                    The simulations showed that the row of operable windows located at 6.2’
               (1.9 m) did not work optimally (see Figure 9-5-14) and required modification to
               improve performance. Because the window panel only allowed for a limited 1.0’
               (0.3 m) opening, incoming airflow circulated toward the interior instead of fol-
               lowing a vertical path near the window panel. A deflector was designed to alter
               the direction of air flow. Four different deflector positions with 30˚ tilts were
               tested before the final configuration (Linden and Carrilho da Graca 2002) (see
               Figure 9-5-15) was determined. A fine grained graphic simulation of airflow was
               undertaken (Figure 9-5-16) and the overall effect remodeled (Figure 9-5-17).
               Comparison of Figures 9-5-14 and 9-5-17 shows a decreased flow of air traveling
               vertically up the windows and an increase in circulation toward the room’s
               interior.




c09.indd 401                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:44:55 AM
          402 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-5-13
          Artistic rendering
          showing the interior of
          the building; note the
          perforated surfaces in
          the furniture.
          Image provided courtesy
          of Morphosis.




          FIGURE 9-5-14
          Airflow simulation
          without deflector in
          place. (See color insert
          for full color figure.)
          Image provided courtesy
          of Natural Works.




                                         All in all, the San Francisco Federal building was able to incorporate many
                                     healthy living amenities and urban features for the surrounding neighborhood.
                                     As seen in an earlier application in the Caltrans Building in Southern California,
                                     the SFFB also incorporated skip-floor elevators, providing office workers with
                                     opportunities for cardiovascular exercise. Workers are able to maintain some




c09.indd 402                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:44:57 AM
               9.5 San Francisco Federal Building     403

                                    FIGURE 9-5-15
                                    Analysis of possible
                                    positions for the
                                    deflector.
                                    Image provided courtesy
                                    of Morphosis.




                                    FIGURE 9-5-16
                                    Analysis showing
                                    airflow around the
                                    selected deflector.
                                    Image provided courtesy
                                    of Morphosis and
                                    Natural Works.




                                    FIGURE 9-5-17
                                    Airflow simulation with
                                    the deflector in place.
                                    (See color insert for full
                                    color figure.)
                                    Image provided courtesy
                                    of Natural Works.




c09.indd 403                                           1/16/08 11:44:58 AM
          404 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               control over their office environment, by adjusting windows to accept breezes
                               from the San Francisco Bay while remaining protected from glare and direct sun.
                               An outdoor sky-garden on the eleventh floor also provides excellent panoramic
                               views. The park-like ground level plaza is for everyone’s use; the facility includes
                               an auditorium for local meetings, a daycare center, and a cafeteria for workers.
                               It provides an attractive new stopping place for this section of the City.

                               9.5.8 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
                               The San Francisco Federal Building offers several lessons in the application of
                               BIM technologies.
                                    The use of Triforma gave Morphosis the ability to continuously check for
                               geometric consistency between the conceptual development model and the vari-
                               ous fabrication models. In this way, it allowed them a great deal of control over
                               the geometric definition of their design and its corresponding details in fabrica-
                               tion models. These visual consistency checks helped them identify and solve
                               problems early in the detailing process. Had these errors not been detected,
                               conflicts would have arisen during the fabrication or installation processes,
                               resulting in unforeseen expenses and delays.
                                    The novel cross-ventilation system – with no mechanical ventilation for
                               offices located near the tower’s perimeter – motivated GSA to invite LBNL,
                               UCSD, and NaturalWorks to serve as technical advisors on the project and
                               validate Morphosis’s design proposal. The use of computational fluid dynamics
                               (CFD) allowed the design team to refine aspects of the system, such as the
                               small wind deflectors located above the operable windows.
                                    Information contained in the architectural models was not structured
                               properly for CFD modeling, requiring the testing team to create an abstraction
                               of the building based on drawings, in order to perform the simulations for test-
                               ing building performance under varied conditions, including those generated
                               automatically by the BAS. In the future, these simulations might also become
                               useful in post occupancy evaluations of the building, to verify the accuracy of
                               anticipated airflow patterns.
                                    It is important to note that the contractor relied on 2D drawings extracted
                               from the Triforma model for coordination and that some of the fabricators also
                               worked in 2D. This early stage BIM effort is useful in documenting the kinds
                               of problems designers were attempting to solve using the limited capabilities
                               available between 2001 and 2004. It is interesting to speculate how the design
                               and construction processes might have been even more efficient using current-
                               generation BIM tools with more advanced interoperability capabilities. Still,
                               further work must be done to extend the use of BIM tools to all team members
                               involved in the construction industry and to extend the associated workflow
                               interoperability to facilitate their use.




c09.indd 404                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:45:02 AM
                                                                                    9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City   405


                 Acknowledgments for SF Federal Building Case Study
                 This case study was written by Hugo A. Sheward for Professor Chuck Eastman in a course offered
                 by the Design Computing Department at Georgia Institute of Technology, Winter 2007. It has been
                 adapted for use in this book. The authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of Tim Christ and
                 Martin Doscher from Morphosis in the preparation of this study.



                    9.6 100 11TH AVENUE, NEW YORK CITY
                              BIM to facilitate design, analysis and prefabrication of a
                              complex curtain wall system.

               9.6.1 Introduction
               This case study identifies innovative approaches in the implementation of
               Building Information Modeling (BIM), with a special focus on the ways in
               which BIM facilitates design, communication, and analysis for curtain wall
               design. The building, located in Manhattan near the Westside Highway and
               19th Street, is a 21-story residential condominium with overall dimensions of
               150 ft. L  75 ft. W  235 ft. H. Figure 9-6-1 shows a rendering of the build-
               ing and a hidden-line view of the curtain wall.
                    The site is located in an area of Chelsea that does not have the same physi-
               cal qualities and amenities as other surrounding areas, such as Greenwich
               Village, where the Perry Street condominium project by Richard Meier has a
               nearby park, high-end retail, and a subway stop. The Highline project, how-
               ever, is catalyzing a significant transformation of this area, with a series of
               projects planned by various renowned architects.


               Table 9-6-1      The project team
                Ownership Group:                             Cape Advisors + Alf Naman Real Estate

                Design Architect:                            Ateliers Jean Nouvel

                Architect of Record:                         Beyer Blinder Belle

                Construction Manager & General Contractor:   Gotham Construction

                Facade Consultant:                           Front Inc.

                Structural Engineer:                         DeSimone Consulting Engineers

                Acoustic Consultant:                         Cerami & Associates

                Curtain Wall Fabrication Team:               CCAFT, SGT, KGE




c09.indd 405                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:45:02 AM
          406 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-6-1
          100 11th Ave.
          in Manhattan, a
          condominium project
          by architect Ateliers
          Jean Nouvel.




                                       This building provides a river-view of the downtown financial district and
                                  the New Jersey shore. The curtain wall facade is therefore an iconic element
                                  of the design. A key concept of the curtain wall is that it is not a load-bearing
                                  enclosure but hangs from the structure of the building. There are also technical
                                  and environmental issues relevant to a glass curtain wall, such as water imper-
                                  meability and insulation, which constrain the morphology of its surface. In this
                                  case, housing ordinances affecting new buildings along the Westside Highway
                                  prescribe a sound transmission class (STC) of 42 for the facade. In this project,
                                  the view is the driving element for the curving of the facade and the configura-
                                  tion of its surface. Another key issue is the faceted surface, which consists of a
                                  series of planes tilted along multiple angles and axes.
                                       Front Inc. was brought in early in the process, at the concept design stage, to
                                  assist the ownership group in evaluating the feasibility of two preliminary proposals
                                  prepared by the design architect. The proposal selected for the overall exterior
                                  surface has two systems. Glass covers 40% of the surface area, which complies
                                  with the New York State energy code provision, which imposes a 50% maximum.




c09.indd 406                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:45:02 AM
                                                                                 9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City   407

               The remaining 60% of the surface area is clad in custom black brick with random
               window openings, within which each window is set at a tilted angle. The curtain
               wall system changes at street level to a hybrid system of a faceted curtain wall and
               a series of cavities with large planters that affect the loading system.
                    The average cost for the overall exterior surface is calculated by weighing
               the cost of each system typology by its proportion of the total surface area. The
               glass and steel facade system, covering 40% of the building, was procured at
               approximately 2.5 times the cost of standard uniform curtain wall systems,
               while the brick and window facade was purchased at approximately 1.0 times
               the same benchmark. Thus the average cost was:

                 2.5  40%  1.0  60%  1.6 the standard uniform curtain wall cost.

                    Relative to the cost typically incurred by condominium developers for
               facades, this system is expensive. The construction cost is estimated at approxi-
               mately 25% the overall hard construction cost of the entire building. A typical
               range is 12% to 15% percent. Although 25% is high, it is still less than clad-
               ding systems designed by architects such as Gehry Partners, Asymptote, or
               Sejima, Nishizawa & Associates, which have costs in the range of 25% to 40%
               of the total construction cost for some building projects. It is clear that for spe-
               cific projects, special facade systems have generated cultural, environmental,
               marketing, and other values.

               9.6.2 BIM Process: Innovation and Challenges
               Building Information Modeling systems are being adopted as a powerful tool
               in the AEC community. Their many features include a robust parametric
               modeler, analysis tools, spreadsheet functionality, API, and file export func-
               tionality. In the case of Front Inc.’s use of Digital Project (DP) for this building,
               the major innovation was in the implementation of modeling tools early in the
               design process. They were able to update and store all product information for
               the curtain wall design and exchange this data with the rest of the project
               team.

               Parametric Modeling
               Marc Simmons and his team at Front Inc. worked as consultants for the owner-
               ship group for approximately six months during the concept phase of the project.
               The design architect, Ateliers Jean Nouvel, and Front Inc. collaborated in the
               conceptualization of the facade system. The challenge in this phase was to
               identify rational ways to systematize the design without compromising the
               aesthetic value of the design concept.




c09.indd 407                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:03 AM
          408 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                          Material Selection. The choice was made to use steel over aluminum for
                                     the framing system, because aluminum would require connections to be
                                     detailed as moment connections with large fasteners and exposed bolts. In
                                     addition, with the complex pattern proposed by Jean Nouvel, linear continuity
                                     for the load path would be difficult; however, a welded steel frame could be
                                     variegated to provide this type of Mondrianesque irregular pattern and still
                                     carry the loads as one network of welded steel members.
                                          Parametric Panels. As can be seen in Figure 9-6-2, Ateliers Jean Nouvel
                                     provided a breakdown of the facade system as a composition of glass panels
                                     with four directions of rotation: tilting up, down, left, and right; four glass varia-
                                     tions; and angles of rotation varying through 0, 2, 3, 4, and 5 degrees off verti-
                                     cal. Front Inc.’s first step was to create an Excel spreadsheet (Figure 9-6-3) for
                                     organizing these parameters along with the glass panel dimensions. The Excel



          FIGURE 9-6-2
          Design architect’s
          drawings produced
          from a FormZ model.
          Colors (shown in gray-
          scale) denote angle and
          direction of rotation
          and glass material type.




c09.indd 408                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:45:04 AM
                                                                                 9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City     409

                                                                                                       FIGURE 9-6-3
                                                                                                       Master spreadsheet
                                                                                                       defining the variations
                                                                                                       in the glass panes.
                                                                                                       The schedule (top
                                                                                                       left) details all of the
                                                                                                       different permutations
                                                                                                       of size, angle and
                                                                                                       coloring used for the
                                                                                                       panes of glass. The
                                                                                                       different frame sizes
                                                                                                       needed are listed on the
                                                                                                       top right sheet, and the
                                                                                                       Excel worksheet that
                                                                                                       drives the schedule and
                                                                                                       its graphics is shown at
                                                                                                       bottom right.




               file would be referenced as a design table in Digital Project to associate all
               parametric variations.
                    Mega-Panel Assembly. Front Inc. proposed a basic grid system that could
               be concealed within the pattern of the facade by keeping the width of the steel
               members constrained to 3 in., as agreed upon with Ateliers Jean Nouvel as a
               reasonable dimension allowing for both structural efficiency and integration of
               panel mechanics. This allowed for the subdivision of the system into mega-
               panels for framing glass sub-panels of varying dimensions, tilt, and materiality.
               In Digital Project, the mega-panels were part-body assemblies with a basic
               parametric wire-frame, as shown in Figure 9-6-4.
                    The mega-panels were associated with a design table and created as a Pow-
               ercopy that could be initiated using values from the spreadsheet. A Powercopy
               is a type of feature template in Digital Project, where the elements are accessi-
               ble for editing. In the case of each mega-panel, the overall dimensions conform
               to each room within the building and become a picture frame. The mega-panel
               dimensions vary from 11 ft.  18 ft. to 20 ft.  37 ft., and they affect the
               dimensions and number of component sub-panels.
                    Curtain Wall Assembly. The overall facade system is made of steel with a
               regulated grid composition of mega-panels and a randomized subdivision of
               glass panes held in aluminum cassettes. In Digital Project, a design table organizes




c09.indd 409                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:45:04 AM
          410 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-6-4
          Original parametric
          Powercopy of a mega-
          panel in Digital Project.




                                      the variations of the 1,351 individual glass panes that make up the facade, by
                                      dimension, configuration, and location in the grid. The frames of the mega-
                                      panels have members 1½ in. wide by 6 in. deep on two sides and the top. The
                                      bottom member is 3 in. wide by 6 in. deep. The profiles of the mullions that sub-
                                      divide the mega-panels vary in cross-section (3  3 in., 3  4 in., 3  5 in., and
                                      3  6 in.) to account for variations in loading. Steel profile protrusions at the
                                      intersections of the mullions vary in length to provide the specified angular tilt of
                                      each sub-panel. The triangular gaps between the glass panes and resulting mul-
                                      lions are closed with steel plates at the head and sill of each pane. The extensions
                                      are welded and sanded smooth to maintain visual continuity between the mul-
                                      lion and the cassettes and to provide a place for thermal and acoustical seals.
                                      These details are shown in Figure 9-6-6 and Figure 9-6-7.
                                           The mega-panels are supported by floor slabs and connect through a steel
                                      spreader beam. The 4 in.  10 in. beam is engineered to minimize deflection
                                      to 1/8 in. The beam has two dead-load connections to the concrete slab and
                                      one wind-load connection. The mega-panel has multiple connections to the
                                      spreader beam, which uniformly distributes the loads. Therefore, the beam
                                      handles the deflection between the two systems. In fabrication, each mega-
                                      panel would be pre-assembled and the beam connected to the panel onsite.

                                      Fabrication Activities
                                      Fabrication Team. For the bidding phase, Front Inc. did preliminary engineering
                                      of the steel and produced a set of drawings for pricing. All bidders came back




c09.indd 410                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:45:05 AM
                                                                              9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City    411

               with bids much higher than the cap price stipulated by the ownership group.
               Front Inc. believed that their skills and BIM technology would enable them to
               deliver the facade at a reasonable cost and asked permission from the owners
               to form a team to galvanize resources that could deliver the project. There was
               an opportunity for great profit, but the financial risk was also very high. Marc
               Simmons, the principal of Front Inc., was prepared to work as design consult-
               ant on the facade contractor side, executing all aspects of the design and incor-
               porating them into the master Digital Project model. Private investors joined
               forces with China Construction America (CCA), a subsidiary of China State
               Construction (the largest construction company in China), to establish a new
               facade contractor named CCAFT. This new company had the financial strength
               to provide bonding for the project, including the ability to subcontract fabrica-
               tion to China-based fabricators, such as SGT and KGE; to subcontract design
               work to Front Inc.; and to subcontract installation work to Island Industries in
               New York.
                    Visual Mock-up. A 15 ft.  42 ft. visual mock-up was fabricated by SGT
               and reviewed in Shenzhen with the ownership and architects in January 2007.
               The mock-up consisted of two curved corner mega-panels and two flat mega-
               panels, as shown in Figure 9-6-5. For the visual mock-up, the steel, aluminum,



                                                                                                    FIGURE 9-6-5
                                                                                                    Photo of a 15 ft. ⴛ
                                                                                                    42 ft. visual mock-up,
                                                                                                    fabricated by SGT in
                                                                                                    Shenzhen, China.




c09.indd 411                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:05 AM
          412 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                  and glass were generated as a 3D solid model in Digital Project, with the design
                                  table information driving the associative parametric sub-assemblies in the
                                  wire-frame armature. From this 3D model, SGT was able to: extract fabrica-
                                  tion geometry and prepare piece drawings according to their own format and
                                  language requirements using Digital Project; and view and interrogate
                                  the model, which was exact and fully engineered in all regards. At the time the
                                  visual mock-up was fabricated, the extruded aluminum profiles were not yet
                                  available; however, SGT was able to use the same parametrically-generated
                                  geometry to create CNC cutting patterns for a break-formed aluminum sheet,
                                  to replicate the geometry of the actual aluminum caps. In the performance
                                  mock-up, this geometry would be used to describe the milling and cutting
                                  paths for delivering the same effect with extruded aluminum profiles. Having
                                  the digital model available with such specificity at this stage was critical and
                                  enabled the creation of an exacting visual mock-up, despite it being out of the
                                  normal fabrication sequence.
                                       Performance Mock-up. A 32 ft.  55 ft. performance mock-up was to be
                                  fabricated and delivered in July 2007 for testing at ATI in Pennsylvania. This
                                  mock-up consisted of two curved corner mega-panels and two flat mega-panels,
                                  as shown in Figure 9-6-6. The mock-up mega-panels were fully detailed to
                                  include locations for the cranes to hook and transport the pre-assembled pan-
                                  els, to keep them level as they are hoisted, and to minimize any risk of glass
                                  breakage. The mock-up was also intended to provide valuable information on



          FIGURE 9-6-6
          Cross-section view of
          mullions, extensions,
          and a glass panel.




c09.indd 412                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:45:08 AM
                                                                                9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City   413

               the process of exchanging product model data with SGT, their ability to meet
               design and engineering specifications and to work within the shipping and
               delivery time constraints. It was also a critical learning and proving stage for
               the installers, who would be responsible for taking ownership of the mega-
               panels and installing them correctly in the testing rig. Production and delivery
               of the mega-panels was planned to begin after review of the mock-up, in a
               sequence matching the construction schedule. The first installation onsite is
               scheduled for January 2008.

               9.6.3 Information Exchange and Interoperability
               One of the most important aspects of BIM is the facilitation of information
               storage and exchange to enhance communication and collaboration in the
               design and construction process. Contractually, Front Inc. was responsible for
               engineering the design of the steel and overall system geometry. Although the
               glass gasket, aluminum, and silicone were not part of their contract, Front Inc.
               modeled all of this information. The model included high-level detail, such as
               the location of air-filled cavities and the meeting points of rain gaskets, to pro-
               vide absolute continuity. The model also included different thicknesses of glass,
               edge bevels, and the thickness of the PVB (Polyvinylbutyral) interlayer laminated
               between the glass panes. Front Inc.’s model became the data repository for the
               entire curtain wall system.
                    Front Inc. used several different software programs, including Rhino, Auto-
               CAD, SolidWorks, and CATIA. They found that CATIA and Digital Project
               (DP) have additional parametric capabilities, as compared to other BIM tools.
               In-house engineering design and analysis for this project was done using DP
               (for geometry and other information) and Robot and Strand (for structural
               analysis). For example, the mega-panel wire-frame was exported from DP in an
               IGES format and brought into the structural analysis tool (Robot) to test deflec-
               tion. Figure 9-6-8 shows how the mega-panels were analyzed for strength and
               deflection in Robot.
                    Profile cross-section details for the framing system were developed in
               AutoCAD, and the 2D information was imported into DP. This was done
               in 2D, because the architect of record required 2D drawing files as well as due
               to the limited number of skilled DP users. The facade was rendered in Flamingo
               and Viz.
                    At the start of the project, Front Inc. received a 3D model with a single-
               polygon representation of tilted glass panels produced in Rhino from Ateliers
               Jean Nouvel. Communication was done principally with renderings and other
               similar information to aid in the visualization of the design proposal and its
               implementation in the new model produced in Digital Project. The DP model




c09.indd 413                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:08 AM
          414 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-6-7
          Slab edge detail.




                               was the facade contractor’s (represented by Front Inc.) expression of the
                               designer’s intent, as defined in the Rhino model.
                                    The facade had to be coordinated with the building itself, and that was
                               done between the façade contractor and the architect of record, Beyer, Blinder,
                               Belle (BBB), who produced the construction documents for the entire build-
                               ing. No construction documents were prepared for the steel and glass facade,
                               allowing the DP model and contractor-side drawings to serve this function. For
                               the facade, the approach was design-build, so Front Inc. and BBB shared shop-
                               drawing information. A great deal of coordination with many iteration cycles
                               was needed. Front Inc. produced documents and passed them to BBB as PDF
                               files. They verified the coordination with their documents and sent information
                               back to Front Inc. such as for slab edge profiles in AutoCAD.
                                    Front Inc. provided the fabricator in China with the 3D model of the final
                               geometry and all other product model information in a CATIA file format.
                               From this model, the fabricator extracted all of the drawings necessary for
                               fabrication.




c09.indd 414                                                                                               1/16/08 11:45:09 AM
                                                                             9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City      415

                                                                                                   FIGURE 9-6-8
                                                                                                   Structural analysis of a
                                                                                                   mega-panel in Robot.
                                                                                                   (See color insert for full
                                                                                                   color figure.)




               9.6.4 Lessons Learned
               Parametric Curtain Wall Catalog
               The most valuable result of the full use of a building model was the ability to
               use parameters associated with a spreadsheet and predicate rules in the pro-
               duction of feature templates that could be re-used. The parametric assembly
               was used to generate multiple solutions for various conditions. By using this
               model, Front Inc. could produce a curtain wall system that was very different
               from the design proposal provided by Jean Nouvel but utilizing the same




c09.indd 415                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:09 AM
          416 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-6-9
          Shop drawing of a
          mega-panel.




                               parametric assembly. Front Inc. foresees that an emerging catalog of these
                               types of parametric assemblies could expedite their work in the future. Marc
                               Simmons described the process as, “Effectively mapping the essential DNA of
                               customized facade assemblies and deploying them to create families of highly
                               differentiated mass-customized facades. This represents a future entirely
                               dependent on integrated practice and fabrication.”

                               Changing the Business Model
                               Dassault Systemes’ CATIA is an integrated tool designed for companies in aer-
                               ospace engineering, where the person responsible for design is also responsible
                               for engineering, sales, and marketing. The use of Digital Project, as a product
                               of the consortium of CATIA and Gehry Technologies, could have similar
                               ramifications in architecture, engineering, and construction in a design-build
                               paradigm.
                                    As a result of this experience, Front Inc. has broadened its services beyond
                               consulting for owners, architects, and contractors. The company is working
                               with architect Point B Design on a gallery project in Philadelphia, where they
                               have designed, engineered, and are in charge of fabrication and delivery of the
                               facade system. They are now engaged in similar deployment strategy for facades
                               designed by Neil Denari Architects in New York City and Tod Williams and
                               Billie Tsien in Amagansett, New York.




c09.indd 416                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:45:10 AM
                                                                                   9.6 100 11th Avenue, New York City   417

               The Need for a BIM Skill Set
               Front Inc. had a team of architects and engineers with various backgrounds.
               Although the majority of the team had received in-house training in Digital
               Project, Marc Simmons, the company principal, explained that one individual
               in particular was truly capable of using this software to its full potential at that
               time. Thanks to his training as an aeronautical engineer, this individual exem-
               plified the new type of role, where the designer is also responsible for detailing
               and performance.
                    Front Inc. now looks for a different skill-set in the pool of applicants eager
               to join the firm, with greater emphasis placed on the use of BIM technology.
               Recent graduates from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, California Polytechnic
               State University, and Georgia Institute of Technology seem to meet the expected
               level of skill and knowledge of building information modeling tools.

               9.6.5 Conclusion
               In this project, a complex aesthetic concept for a curtain wall system was
               resolved in a building information model with a set of regulating lines in order
               to structure a hierarchical nesting of parameters bound to design tables. Visu-
               ally, the effect of the regulating grid is neutralized, because of the complexity
               of the subdivision of the system. Therefore the legibility of the vertical and
               horizontal lines is reduced, and the variegated texture of the facade is empha-
               sized.
                    Because this innovative curtain wall system entailed a financial risk, the
               ownership group looked at the contract early and asked Front Inc. to find solu-
               tions that would enable the design proposal to be realized with the lowest pos-
               sible cost risk.
                    Building information modeling is impacting the way architects design and
               how buildings are constructed. Because the model becomes the central database
               of information, the analysis of design ideas and building performance, cost esti-
               mation, and construction scheduling can be done with greater accuracy. By using
               the same model, architects, engineers, contractors, and manufacturers can com-
               municate and implement changes to the design quickly. Communication, how-
               ever, is limited by two main factors that affect the BIM process. At the basic level,
               not all members of the AEC team may be using the same or compatible software;
               therefore information is lost in the exchange of model files. In addition, for BIM
               tools to be used to their full capability, additional expertise and skills are required
               of architects and designers, beyond the limits of commonly accepted skills. In
               this case study, these problems were avoided because of the unique skill-set of the
               Front Inc. team and their management of all information contained within
               the curtain wall design. At a more complex level, communication during the




c09.indd 417                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:45:11 AM
          418 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                      design and construction process is fragmented by other structures in place, hav-
                                      ing to do with the definition of professional roles and responsibilities within the
                                      AEC team. In this example, a different model of services was developed.



               Acknowledgments for 100 11th Ave. NYC Case Study
               This case study was prepared by Paola Sanguinetti for Professor Chuck Eastman in a course offered
               in the College of Architecture Ph.D. Program at the Georgia Institute of Technology, Winter 2006. It
               has been adapted for use in this book. The authors wish to acknowledge and thank Marc Simmons
               and Dario Caravati of Front Inc. for providing the bulk of the information. The images are courtesy
               of Front Inc. (Marc Simmons, Dario Caravati and Philip Khalil) and Ateliers Jean Nouvel.



                                           9.7 ONE ISLAND EAST PROJECT
                                                  Owner/developer BIM application to support design manage-
                                                  ment, tendering, coordination, and construction planning

                                     9.7.1 Introduction
                                     This case study documents the implementation of BIM to manage the func-
                                     tional and financial relationships between design, construction, and facility
                                     management on a large, complex project by an owner-developer. The owner
                                     identified the potential of BIM to manage information more efficiently and save
                                     time and cost over the project lifecycle. This case study discusses how the owner
                                     initiated the BIM effort on the One Island East (OIE) project after design using
                                     2D tools had already started, worked closely with their design/construction
                                     team and technology team, and integrated BIM into the design and construc-
                                     tion of the project. The study discusses training of the project team in the Dig-
                                     ital Project BIM software to support design, clash detection and correction,
                                     quantity takeoff and tendering, coordination of the team, and 4D planning.
                                          Swire Properties is one of the top developers and industry leaders involved
                                     in the construction industry’s transformation in Hong Kong. One of their
                                     projects, OIE, is a large commercial office building with seventy floors that is
                                     currently under construction in Hong Kong. Table 9-7-1 provides an overview
                                     of the basic project information. Figure 9-7-1 shows a computer rendering of
                                     the planned office building. As an owner, Swire’s organization is responsible
                                     for managing the design and construction and the leasing and operations of the
                                     facility. In addition to this facility, Swire manages hundreds of facilities or
                                     projects at any given time; and was seeking better tools to both oversee and
                                     coordinate the design and construction process and potentially link the building




c09.indd 418                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:11 AM
                                                                                       9.7 One Island East Project   419

               Table 9-7-1       Summary of One Island East Project Information.
                Location              Hong Kong, China

                Project Name          One Island East (OIE)

                Contract Type         Competitive tendering

                Construction Cost     $300 million (approximately)

                Project Scale         70 Floors with 2 basement levels
                                      Total floor area: 141,000 m2 (1,517,711 sf)
                                      Typical floor area: 2,270 m2 (24,434 sf)

                Schedule              Period of construction: 24 months
                                      Expected completion: March 2008

                Current Stage         Under construction as of January 2007

                Owner                 Swire Properties Limited

                Architect             Wong & Ouyang (HK) Limited

                Quantity Surveyor     Levett & Bailey Quantity Surveyor Limited

                Contractor            Gammon Construction Limited

                BIM Consultant        Gehry Technologies

                Functions             Office and Commercial Facilities

                Structure             Reinforced Concrete

                Exterior              Aluminum Curtain Wall




               information to their facility management systems. In particular, Swire was
               looking for a building management tool capable of managing a very large
               project or several such projects with the capability to link design information,
               cost and schedule data, construction process management, quality assurance
               and facilities management.
                   Furthermore, as part of their commitment to improving the quality of their
               buildings, Swire recognized the potential of BIM to increase the quality control
               and efficiency of their buildings over the entire facility lifecycle.

               9.7.2 Pre-Tender Stage BIM Implementation Process
               The OIE project was in schematic design phase when Swire was researching
               BIM systems. They attended a presentation by Gehry Technologies (GT)
               together with the Hong Kong Polytechnic University held in early 2004 where




c09.indd 419                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:12 AM
          420 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-7-1
          Computer rendering of
          the proposed building.




                                   the Swire team saw a demonstration of Digital Project software. After serious
                                   consideration, Swire Properties adopted Digital Project (DP) as their company-
                                   wide BIM management tool in February 2005. The DP system was designed to
                                   support large, complex projects and manage relationships to various informa-
                                   tion sources such as cost, construction, and facility management.
                                       At the time of DP adoption the OIE project team was performing schematic
                                   design with traditional 2D drawings. The four key project organizations were
                                   already on the project:

                                       • The design consultant team consisted of the architect, the structural
                                         engineer, the mechanical and electrical engineer (M&E), and the quan-
                                         tity surveyor. Wong & Ouyang Hong Kong Limited led the design.
                                       • Structural design was provided by Ove Arup & Partners Hong Kong
                                         Limited.
                                       • Meinhardt (M&E) Limited was responsible for the M&E engineering
                                         design.
                                       • Levett & Bailey Quantity Surveyor Limited was responsible for all
                                         aspects of cost control.

                                       Initially, these four companies, which comprised the design consultant
                                   team, communicated with each other using 2D drawings but subsequently




c09.indd 420                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:45:12 AM
                                                                                      9.7 One Island East Project      421

                                                                                                    FIGURE 9-7-2
                                                                                                    Integration of BIM
                                                                                                    within the project
                                                                                                    team.




                                                                                                    FIGURE 9-7-3
                                                                                                    Translation from
                                                                                                    2D to 3D.




               developed a full 3D process using DP’s BIM software as shown Figure 9-7-2.
               To expedite the process, GT provided BIM consultancy services and led the
               BIM implementation and training.
                   The building information model was initiated by Gehry Technologies, who
               then trained the design consultant team for three weeks. The actual modeling
               team consisted of architects, structural engineers, MEP engineers, and quantity
               surveyors. After becoming proficient in the use of DP, the design consultant
               team took over the BIM process and completed the building model. GT and the
               design consultant team cooperated closely in this effort.

               Creation and Coordination of the Building Information Model
               Almost all coordination issues were managed using BIM. The BIM consultant
               team, the OIE design team, and the project manager worked in one room for
               the first year. The design team consisted of four architects, four structural




c09.indd 421                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:45:13 AM
          422 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                  engineers, six MEP engineers, two quantity surveyors, one project manager,
                                  one MEP project manager, and four GT BIM consultants. Everyone involved
                                  worked either directly or indirectly on coordinating the input of information
                                  into the building model. Project team members also communicated with each
                                  other through a portal site maintained by Swire Properties, which became the
                                  main communication platform for the BIM process. Project information that
                                  was not contained directly in the BIM was delivered and shared through the
                                  portal. The BIM implementation team met weekly for the first year to identify
                                  and resolve errors, clashes, and other design problems using the BIM.
                                       In practice, many unofficial coordination meetings also took place, because
                                  the team was located in the same workspace. A number of clashes and errors
                                  were identified and managed before tendering and construction. Figure 9-7-4
                                  shows how the clashes between elements of different disciplines could be identi-
                                  fied easily in the 3D model. Clash detection was mainly achieved using functions
                                  contained within the DP software, which is able to identify geometric clashes

          FIGURE 9-7-4
          Examples of automated
          clash detections.




c09.indd 422                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:45:14 AM
                                                                                           9.7 One Island East Project   423

               and automatically generate a list. Double-clicking on an item in the list takes the
               user to the virtual geometric location of the clash. The structure is then corrected
               and re-designed by the appropriate project team member. The user can specify
               the tolerance of the clash-check, and this clash tolerance can be designated as the
               standard.
                    Traditionally, clashes are identified manually by design consultants using
               overlaid drawings on a light table. Correspondingly, in the past, a great deal of
               clash detection and management was left to constructors. Through BIM, over
               2,000 clashes and errors were found prior to tendering and construction, which
               means that a substantial cost savings was achieved, compared to the incom-
               plete design information inherent in a traditional 2D process.


               Organization and Structure of the Building Information Model
               This section describes the way information was structured using Digital
               Project.
                   A typical building information model can consist of hundreds or even
               thousands of parts (referred to in Chapter 2 as an object or building compo-
               nent). A part can be a wall, columns of a floor, an escalator or an HVAC run.
               Another type of file, called the Product Structure is used to organize these parts
               within an hierarchical structure (also called a tree structure). This approach
               has several powerful implications:

                   • One can open the entire building model or just one branch of it. An
                     example would be a floor of a building or a building service system, such
                     as HVAC or Drainage.
                   • Large teams can work on the same DP master-model concurrently,
                     because each file is an autonomous entity. Modelers can use a tool called
                     CVS (Concurrent Versioning System) to manage file permissions for
                     modelers.
                   • It is possible to load a part from different Product Structures. For exam-
                     ple, one can create a tree to load the building floor-by-floor and at the
                     same time create another tree organized by function (Figure 9-7-5).
                   • Parts files can be interlinked and therefore influence each other’s geom-
                     etry in a parametric way.

                   A detailed example of a typical project tree-structure is shown in Figure 9-7-6.
                   A typical BIM model is structured in a way that has the main building
               parts, such as PODIUM and TOWERS, e.g., POD, T01, at the highest level.
               Each main building part is then organized by floor and also contains branches
               for parts that are not floor specific. Examples of the latter are the branches for




c09.indd 423                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:45:16 AM
          424 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-7-5
          BIM database
          structure.
          This figure shows that
          files can be organized
          in multiple ways: by
          floor, by HVAC zone,
          by function and by
          construction package.
          The same part file
          can be referenced
          in multiple product
          structures.




                                   the main driver files, lift cars, and section drawing files. Driver files contain
                                   information for details, such as column centers, floor-level planes (e.g., Finishing
                                   and Structural Floor Levels, SFL & FFL respectively), and zoning cuts (for ter-
                                   minating columns and beams that extend beyond each zone). The parametric
                                   nature of DP allows one to change a floor level and automatically update all of
                                   its related geometries. Driver elements are published and thus made available
                                   as linkable objects. Each floor contains five sub-branches: (1) a branch with
                                   floor specific-drawing files, such as plans; (2) a branch containing driver files
                                   called DRV; and (3-5) three sub-branches that contain the actual geometry.
                                   There is a branch for architectural elements: walls, finishes, balustrades, land-
                                   scape elements, sanitary, escalators and lifts; a branch for structural elements:
                                   core walls, columns, slabs, beams, stairs and ramps; and a branch for MEP ele-
                                   ments: HVAC systems, drainage pipes, etc.
                                        The current OIE BIM model is approximately five gigabytes in size. It
                                   opens easily on a laptop, and there are no data management problems. Infor-
                                   mation is organized properly, and only material that is being worked on is
                                   opened and shown in full detail so that it can be updated. Items surrounding
                                   the item being worked on are shown grayed out and in less detail using Com-
                                   puter Graphic Representation (CGR). This reduces data size but can still pro-
                                   vide clash detection and measurement information.

                                   Tendering
                                   DP’s BIM tool measured many of the quantities automatically; however,
                                   the quantity of reinforcing bar in the structure was calculated manually




c09.indd 424                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:45:16 AM
               9.7 One Island East Project    425

                             FIGURE 9-7-6
                             BIM Data Structure
                             for the Podium
                             showing the tree
                             structure for this part
                             of the building.




                             FIGURE 9-7-7
                             Automated quantity
                             takeoff for the
                             generation of the Bill
                             of Quantities in Excel
                             Format.




c09.indd 425                                   1/16/08 11:45:17 AM
          426 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                using the ratio of rebar to concrete. DP could have provided this capability if
                                the rebar had been modeled explicitly. All elements modeled in the BIM process
                                included their own attributes, such as size, weight, area, volume, etc. Such
                                quantitative information was tabulated automatically and imported into the
                                Excel spreadsheet shown in Figure 9-7-7. This approach increased accuracy

          FIGURE 9-7-8
          Site progress as of
          January 2007.




c09.indd 426                                                                                                1/16/08 11:45:18 AM
                                                                                          9.7 One Island East Project   427

               and reduced the effort and time normally required for manual quantity takeoff.
               Furthermore, the quantities were linked to the BIM, which enabled them to
               automatically update when the design changed. The BIM model was provided
               to all of the tenderers, enabling them to confirm the bill of quantities firsthand
               using the model. This improved the tender process and resulted in lower cost
               estimates and reduced risk.
                    Tendering for the OIE project was greatly improved by precise quantity
               extractions from the BIM. Construction companies that bid on the OIE project
               saved time and money because they did not need to measure the quantities
               manually. The increase in accuracy of quantity takeoffs also helped the quality
               of construction and reduced the contractors’ risk. BIM was used to track the
               cost implications of contemplated changes onsite. Designers and engineers
               could easily coordinate with each other by checking all elements using 3D BIM
               (Figure 9-7-12), which has traditionally been a difficult process using 2D
               drawings.



               9.7.3 Post-Tender Stage BIM Implementation Process
               At the time of writing, nearly one-half of the 24-month construction program
               had passed, and the structure had progressed on schedule (Figure 9-7-9). After
               tendering, the contractor’s construction BIM model was updated by Gammon
               Construction Limited. A substantial amount of additional information regard-
               ing construction objects, such as formwork and other temporary structures,
               was added by the contractors. Of course, the model is in accordance with the
               pre-tender design intent. Gammon has realized the added value of using BIM
               technology in construction.
                    By utilizing the BIM elements developed by the design consultant and
               contractor project teams, advanced construction process modeling was also
               carried out to further verify the construction methodology. Gammon Construc-
               tion Limited called upon the expertise of the Hong Kong Polytechnic University’s
               Construction Virtual Prototyping Laboratory, led by Professor Heng Li, to pro-
               duce detailed visualizations of the construction sequencing. Links were created
               between DP’s BIM elements and the detailed Gammon Primavera construction
               schedule. This enabled the visualization of construction sequence which was a
               helpful tool for the contractor, called 4D CAD (see Figure 9-7-10). Visualiza-
               tions of the sequence of erection of building elements could be created easily,
               according to the Primavera early or late start sequence. In this way, Gammon
               was able to visualize and analyze various scenarios (see Figure 9-7-10); and
               spatial/safety issues could be identified prior to construction (see Figure 9-7-11).
               For example, the sequence of formwork erection for a typical floor was checked
               and re-checked to ensure that a construction cycle of four floors per day could




c09.indd 427                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:45:20 AM
          428 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-7-9
          Schedule integration
          and visualization.
          Image provided
          courtesy of Gammon
          Construction Ltd. and
          Professor Heng Li at
          Hong Kong Polytechnic
          University.




          FIGURE 9-7-10
          Illustration of the
          construction sequence
          (see color insert for full
          color figure).
          Image provided
          courtesy of Gammon
          Construction Ltd. and
          Professor Heng Li at
          Hong Kong Polytechnic
          University.




c09.indd 428                               1/16/08 11:45:20 AM
               9.7 One Island East Project   429

                             FIGURE 9-7-11
                             Illustration of clash
                             detection.
                             Courtesy of Gammon
                             Construction Ltd. And
                             Professor Heng Li at
                             Hong Kong Polytechnic
                             University.




                             FIGURE 9-7-12
                             Three-dimensional
                             coordination of all
                             project elements. (See
                             color inserts for full
                             colored figures.)
                             A) Structural and MEP
                             elements at a typical
                             floor lebel;
                             B) Piping in basement
                             area under ground
                             level;
                             C) MEP elements in
                             the basement levels
                             of the building.




c09.indd 429                                  1/16/08 11:45:24 AM
          430 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                    be maintained. The construction methodology for the difficult outrigger floors
                                    was carefully examined to ensure safety and practicality. This saved time and
                                    money in the field.



                                    9.7.4 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
                                    One of the main challenges for the project team was transitioning from 2D to
                                    3D. Swire Properties mitigated potential cultural issues by requiring the use
                                    of 3D and the DP system on the project. Furthermore, Swire hired Gehry Tech-
                                    nologies as a consultant to provide the adequate training and support during
                                    the first year of the BIM effort. In the future, Swire Properties hopes to achieve
                                    even greater value when the BIM technology and working methods are imple-
                                    mented from the very beginning of the process.
                                         A second critical lesson is to select a BIM application and system appropri-
                                    ate for the type of projects and business goals of an organization. Swire carefully
                                    reviewed and assessed technologies based on their long-term organizational
                                    needs. Since Swire builds large, complex facilities, the selection of DP was
                                    critical both in supporting their long-term investment as well as ensuring that
                                    their project team would not face daily issues with managing model size or
                                    complexity.
                                         The post-tender stage is not yet complete, so it is impossible to quantify all
                                    of the benefits and problems associated with BIM implementation in this phase.
                                    At this point it is possible to say that there have been significant savings in cost
                                    and time resulting from the reduction in design errors found by clash detec-
                                    tion. The careful 4D analysis performed by Prof. Heng Li’s group provided
                                    assurance that a fast and safe schedule could be achieved. Quantitative infor-
                                    mation, such as the number of change orders, safety records, budget perform-
                                    ance, schedule performance, etc. will ultimately help measure the value added
                                    by the use of BIM.




               Acknowledgments for One Island East Project
               This case study was originally written by Sung Joon Suk and Martin Riese for Professor Chuck
               Eastman in a course offered by the Design Computing Department at the Georgia Institute of
               Technology, Winter 2006 and has been adapted for use in this book. The authors wish to
               acknowledge the assistance of Swire Properties and Gehry Technology in the preparation of this
               study.




c09.indd 430                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:27 AM
                                                                                 9.8 Penn National Parking Structure   431

                    9.8 PENN NATIONAL PARKING STRUCTURE
                           Use of BIM by a precast concrete subcontractor for detailed
                           design and prefabrication

               9.8.1 Introduction
               In 2005, the first entirely precast concrete parking structure engineered and
               designed by a precast producer using parametric 3D modeling was built at the
               Charles Town Racetrack in West Virginia. The precaster, however, used
               the 3D model only for internal processes. Communication between the archi-
               tects, engineers, and precast fabricator was carried out using traditional 2D
               drawings. The precaster produced 2D erection drawings and shop drawings of
               the pieces (called shop tickets) for review.
                     Soon after completion of the Charles Town Racetrack, the same team—
               owner, architect, engineer, contractor and precaster—found themselves working
               together on a similar but larger project, the Penn National Parking Structure in
               Grantville, Pennsylvania. This time, the model was used more extensively for
               design collaboration and construction. The second project is the subject of this
               case study.
                     The Penn National Parking Structure is 303 ft. wide, 497 ft. long, and pro-
               vides 773,498 sq. ft. on five levels (slab-on-grade and four levels above grade).
               It is a total precast structure, with cast-in-place concrete toppings on the decks,
               aluminum and glass curtain walls enclosing the stair towers and decorative
               column covers, and other details built of studs and EIFS boards.
                     Design of the building began in July 2005, and implementation of the pre-
               cast model commenced in June 2006. Construction was scheduled to begin dur-
               ing the first quarter of 2007. The owner employed the construction manager
               under a guaranteed maximum price contract, and the precaster contracted with
               the construction manager under a fixed price contract for design, construction,
               and erection. Figure 9-8-1 shows a general view of the building, as it was
               designed.
                     Because the parking deck is open to the environment, it did not require
               ventilation and heating/cooling analyses or coordination with window and door
               suppliers, plumbing fixtures, or mechanical systems. For these reasons, the case
               study focuses primarily on the experience of the precast fabricator, who used
               BIM to interact with architects and structural engineers. For the precast fabri-
               cator, the innovation consisted of using a parametric 3D model throughout the
               process. In the company’s earlier projects using BIM, the model had served
               exclusively for sales and automated preparation of general arrangement and
               shop drawings. Here its use was extended to structural analysis and design,
               design coordination with architects, submittals for structural design approvals,




c09.indd 431                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:45:27 AM
          432 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-8-1
          General view of the
          Penn National Parking
          Structure.




                                  Table 9-8-1      The project participants:
                                   Owner:                            Penn National Gaming

                                   Architect:                        Urban Design Group Inc, Atlanta, GA

                                   Structural Engineer:              Gregory P. Luth Associates (GPLA), Santa Clara, CA

                                   Precast Contractor:               High Concrete Structures Inc., Denver, PA

                                   Construction Managers:            Keating Building Corp., Philadelphia, PA



                                  quantity takeoffs, and production planning. The software used by both the pre-
                                  caster and the structural engineer was Tekla Structures Version 12.0.

                                  9.8.2 Conceptual Design
                                  The building was first modeled by the precaster after a bid was requested by
                                  the construction manager. The precaster was given the freedom to propose a
                                  structural system, including the internal layout of columns and spans to pro-
                                  vide a constructible and cost effective structure. In the first iteration, all of the
                                  structural elements were modeled, showing only their external geometry, and
                                  no connections were detailed between them. This phase took only nine hours,
                                  partly due to the team’s experience with parking structures.
                                      The precast modeler explained: “After this conceptual model (nine hours)
                                  we e-mailed the Web viewer and PDF files of a typical plan and the exterior




c09.indd 432                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:45:28 AM
                                                                                9.8 Penn National Parking Structure   433

               elevations to the architect, owner, and engineer of record. The following morn-
               ing we had a conference call with all parties, reviewed the concept, and dis-
               cussed the foundations (more of a cast-in-place interface) and our concerns/
               recommendations for framing at stair towers and fire requirements, as the
               garage adjoined the casino. After this call we worked on the model for another
               six hours to incorporate the changes discussed.”
                    For each design iteration, a detailed list of the precast components, with
               accurate measures of their concrete volume, was extracted and imported into
               Excel to generate the company’s price estimate for the building.
                    Using the model as a medium of communication, they conveyed the con-
               cept to the owners, coupled with a very quick turnaround time to respond to
               their requests for modifications. This proved to be a powerful tool and was
               instrumental in the company winning the contract for the building. The pre-
               caster was able to rapidly model and estimate the costs of various alternatives,
               which allowed the construction manager and the owner to make decisions with
               confidence. For example, the decision was made to build precast stairs through-
               out, unlike the steel with concrete-fill stairs used in the earlier Charles Town
               project.

               9.8.3 Design Development and Analysis
               Once the contract phase was complete, the building was handed over to the
               company’s engineering department. In the handover meeting, the modelers
               and estimators projected the model onto a wall-sized screen and manipulated
               it to explain the project, instead of the accepted practice of providing reams of
               2D drawings, notes, and calculations to the engineers. The handover proved to
               be extremely efficient. The engineers were able to quickly focus their ques-
               tions, because the presentation was clear and concise. More importantly, the
               scope of the project was defined with precision. Lack of clarity about exactly
               what would work was the responsibility of the precast company and was
               included in the contract, as opposed to various tasks being performed by oth-
               ers, which was a source of conflicts with general contractors in previous
               projects.
                    The sales model was then developed into a design and production model.
               The engineer of record was responsible for overall structural stability, which
               included concern for interfaces between the precast building, its cast-in-place
               foundations, and a neighboring structural steel building. Approximately one
               year earlier, a number of precast concrete companies, with whom the engineer
               had collaborated, began using the 3D modeling software used by structural
               steel detailers. The engineer’s practice had decided to adopt the same software.
               Therefore, they were able to receive the precaster’s model directly.




c09.indd 433                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:28 AM
          434 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                             The results of the engineer’s lateral analyses were provided to the precaster
                                        for detailed design of the individual pieces and connections. Structural analyses
                                        of the pieces were performed in three ways: (1) using the modeling software’s
                                        interface to the STAAD PRO finite-element (FEM) analysis package; (2) using
                                        Microsoft Excel design tables prepared in-house; and (3) using LEAP Software
                                        Inc.’s PRESTO and AXSYS applications. Figure 9-8-2 shows a model of the
                                        stack of four lite-wall pieces and the analysis software. The typical turnaround
                                        time for a single analysis run using the FEM package was 40 minutes and
                                        included: definition of loads, exporting to the FEM package, execution of the
                                        analysis, and importing the results back to the model. Engineering the design
                                        of the individual pieces to carry the necessary loads was performed directly
                                        within the model using LEAP software’s PRESTO and AXSYS plug-in
                                        applications.
                                             Modeling the precast structure revealed potential misunderstandings or
                                        inconsistencies in the set of architectural design drawings but also expedited their
                                        resolution. For example, the modeler could not determine the correct location of
                                        the EIFS board column cover to the precast column, shown in Figure 9-8-3,
                                        because it appeared differently in the elevation compared to the detail. Issues
                                        such as this were clarified rapidly by using model images over telephone confer-
                                        ences. Similarly, the modeler encountered situations not fully defined in the
                                        architectural details. For example, a spandrel adjacent to a shear wall was not
                                        detailed in the architectural drawings, because there were no sections cut there.
                                        These issues were resolved quickly, because the modeler could demonstrate to
                                        the architects exactly which details lacked definition.



          FIGURE 9-8-2
          A) A stack of lite-wall
          precast pieces in the
          Tekla Structures model
          with loads defined, and
          B) the same section in
          the STAAD PRO finite
          element analysis. (See
          color insert for full color
          figure.)




c09.indd 434                                                                                                             1/16/08 11:45:29 AM
                                                                               9.8 Penn National Parking Structure   435

                                                                                                     FIGURE 9-8-3
                                                                                                     A corner column detail
                                                                                                     (left) and the column
                                                                                                     cover in the model
                                                                                                     (right).
                                                                                                     The location of the
                                                                                                     edge of the cover
                                                                                                     relative to the primary
                                                                                                     axis appeared different
                                                                                                     in the detail compared
                                                                                                     to the elevation
                                                                                                     drawings and was
                                                                                                     resolved by modeling it
                                                                                                     in the precast model.
                                                                                                     Image courtesy of Urban
                                                                                                     Design Group, Inc.



                    Another issue identified by the architects involved a situation where dou-
               ble tee bearings would have obstructed egress through a door in the stair tower.
               The precaster changed the bearing type from a corbel to a pocket, solving the
               issue. The principal architect responded to the BIM process by saying, “What
               I found so appealing about the model is the way in which the connections
               could all be seen clearly and had the ability to avoid future conflict.”


               9.8.4 Detailing for Fabrication
               The submission of drawings for review, both structural and architectural, is
               usually a lengthy process and is often performed in batches due to the slow
               pace of shop drawing generation. The Penn National building has 1,300 indi-
               vidual pieces of precast concrete, with 50 unique designs. Structural review
               was performed directly using the model. It was straightforward, because the
               structural engineer used the same BIM software (Tekla Structures), obviating
               the need for translations. The precaster was still required to submit drawings
               through the channel specified in the contract (the construction manager) to
               meet legal requirements. This highlights the need for new contract terms that
               would enable the realization of BIM’s benefits without perpetuating practices
               that were appropriate for communication using 2D drawings alone.
                   As in most precast buildings with at least some architectural detail, the
               precaster was required to produce a mock-up piece, showing the salient fea-
               tures that would appear in the real pieces and invite the architect to view it.
               The mock-up piece was modeled to float above the building in the real model
               and manufactured using information drawn directly from the model itself.
               Both the virtual and the real mock-up pieces are shown in Figure 9-8-4.




c09.indd 435                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:30 AM
          436 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-8-4
          Mock-up of a precast
          piece, showing
          the depth surface
          treatments on the
          facade, in the
          model and as it was
          produced.




                                       The construction manager expressed satisfaction with respect to the coor-
                                 dination of the interface between the parking structure and the main building
                                 it is attached to. The structural steel frame of the main building was also mod-
                                 eled, and the visual clarity of both models allowed the construction manager’s
                                 firm to feel confident that the two structures had been coordinated properly. In
                                 an earlier project, the manager commissioned the construction of a physical
                                 model to understand the interfaces between parking, retail, and hotel areas of
                                 a building. In this case, a physical model was not needed.
                                       Once the model was fully detailed, the construction sequence was deter-
                                 mined with the erection crew superintendent, by consulting the model. Setting
                                 the sequence is a complex task, because pieces key into one another in differ-
                                 ent ways that restrict the way they are to be maneuvered into place, and also
                                 because the partly erected structure must be checked for stability at every
                                 step. The visualization proved sufficiently powerful to enable the erection
                                 superintendent to consider using two cranes instead of the usual one. In addi-
                                 tion to ensuring that the two cranes would not interfere with one another, the
                                 fabricator was able to address other issues involved in scheduling the two
                                 cranes. Erection crews commonly experience delays when design or drafting




c09.indd 436                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:45:30 AM
                                                                                9.8 Penn National Parking Structure   437

               errors result in pieces not fitting together. In such situations, repairs, adapta-
               tions to connectors or even replacement pieces are needed, resulting in
               downtime for the crane and crew. The Charles Town project mentioned ear-
               lier, however, was erected without a single error in the pieces, which increased
               the superintendents’ confidence in simultaneously scheduling two cranes and
               crews.
                     The ability to reliably plan an erection schedule is not only important for
               crews but for production itself. In this project, erection sequencing data was
               used to schedule production. Phasing data was first used to create stepped bills
               of material for purchase and/or fabrication of rebar, embedded hardware, and
               other components. This has a number of benefits that made the process leaner:
               by reducing work-in-progress, raw material, and parts inventory. It also meant
               that ordering was controlled and the waste of excess parts typically ordered in
               previous jobs was avoided. Finally, fabrication of the pieces themselves in closer
               relation to the erection sequence reduced the number of pieces in the storage
               yard.
                     The most easily measured (but not necessarily the largest) benefit in this
               project was a reduction in engineering and drafting hours. The precast com-
               pany spent approximately 52% of the hours budgeted for an equivalent 2D
               CAD design process. Some of this benefit can be attributed to prior experience
               with the Charles Town project, including the availability of the building model
               and the custom connections and parts that had been prepared for it.

               9.8.5 Conclusions and Lessons Learned
               Representatives of the precaster reported some specific lessons learned in this
               project. First, visual coordination using a model helped prevent constructabil-
               ity errors in shop drawings from reaching the production plant. This was
               underlined during modeling with some of the company’s standard connections.
               For example, the modeling of a standard girder-column haunch detail, which
               had been repeated for years in CAD drawings, revealed a spatial conflict
               between a steel plate and a set of rebars. Production personnel simply bent the
               rebars to accommodate the plate. The error was fixed in the new BIM connec-
               tion detail.
                    Another visualization benefit experienced earlier in the Charles Town
               project was emphasized: the power of the model to communicate the design
               intent to the owner. In these two projects, the owner raised no complaints or
               issues at the end of construction, and this was attributed in part to the explana-
               tory power of the model, according to the precasters.
                    In this case study, the degree of BIM adoption across various parties was
               not uniform. Along with concomitant technology issues, this led the participants




c09.indd 437                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:31 AM
          438 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               to feel that the technology’s full potential had not been realized. The principal
                               architect expressed this succinctly:

                                   “The model being shared outside of High Concrete Structures, Inc. for
                                   design verification, coordination, and for the resolution of clash conflicts
                                   has been worthwhile. However, the use of the model has not appeared to
                                   go beyond this. What is missing is the ability to have other team members
                                   actively interface by using the model (outside of the two structural engineer-
                                   ing groups). We as the architects could only view a slimmed-down version
                                   and would not be in anyway capable of interlacing our other non-precast
                                   components into the model. Other projects we are doing are moving into a
                                   full BIM format.”

                                  Other participants suggested changes made possible by BIM that would
                               improve their processes in the future:

                                   • The engineer is responsible for the integrity of the structure as a whole
                                     and envisions preparing a conceptual design model in Tekla Structures,
                                     then passing it to the subcontractors of all structural components (steel,
                                     precast and cast-in-place concrete) for detailing. In this way, the engineer
                                     has a higher degree of confidence that everything will fit, obviating the
                                     need for additional review and possibly rework for all parties at the sub-
                                     mittal review stage. Ideally, they would then use an intelligent software
                                     tool to check whether the subcontractors’ detailed designs conform to
                                     their original design intent by performing comparisons directly within
                                     the model.
                                   • Coordination with the cast-in-place (CIP) concrete and electrical sub-
                                     contractors. The precaster was responsible for coordinating drainage
                                     slopes, electrical block-outs in tees for conduit and lighting, and anchor
                                     bolts for light standards on the roof. Coordination with CIP is needed
                                     for base plates and embeds, such as Lenton splice sleeves (a pivot which
                                     is grouted after assembly and needs ¼ in. tolerance) and dowel sleeves.
                                     In this project, they produced PDF documents of model views, but they
                                     could easily provide a full model to the CIP detailers.
                                   • Standard connections and details in the modeling software could
                                     improve productivity well beyond what was achieved.
                                   • Using model viewers in plant production shops and also for erection
                                     could improve productivity of those activities.
                                   • The precast company is in the process of implementing a corporate-
                                     wide management information system using SAP. Exporting of bills of




c09.indd 438                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:45:31 AM
                                                                                9.8 Penn National Parking Structure   439

                     material directly to the corporate SAP system is planned, but they were
                     entered manually for this project.

                    A specific demand made by several of the precast company’s quality con-
               trol personnel provided an interesting anecdote that underscores the extent to
               which BIM adoption required changes in their organizational culture. Some
               QC inspectors, who check that drawings submitted to the plant for production
               are correct and complete, found fault with the fact that a series of embedded
               plate assemblies in a precast beam were each shown on the BIM shop drawing
               with identification codes annotated separately. Standard company practice
               required that such plates be labeled collectively, with a single text ID code, to
               ensure identical fabrication and installation. The demand that shop drawings
               look exactly like 2D CAD drawings resulted in the modelers having to erase
               the accurate associative annotations placed automatically by the system and
               replace them with manually applied and more error-prone dummy text notes.
                    While this case study demonstrates that significant progress has been
               made, it is important to note that the use of BIM is still in its infancy. The
               structural engineer emphasized that the full potential of BIM for design devel-
               opment and coordination will only be realized when all three of the following
               conditions are met:
                    All of the designers and detailers use BIM tools. If any one of them uses
               2D drawings, then the whole team’s workflow remains as a 2D workflow, with
               long cycle times for submittal and review and likely coordination problems.
                    The richness of data exchange between BIM tools is significantly
               improved. Exchange using IFCs (see Chapter 3) is still inadequate for transfer-
               ring anything but 3D geometry, due to discrepancies between the ways that
               each software vendor implements their export and import routines.
                    The project management and participants are committed to a more col-
               laborative and lean design process, in which information is shared openly
               and cycle-times are reduced.


                 Acknowledgments for Penn National Case Study
                 The authors greatly appreciate the help of the following professionals, whose assistance in com-
                 piling this case study was invaluable: Dave Bosch, Bill Whary, Karen Laptas, and Dave Foley at
                 High Concrete Structures Inc.; Gregory Luth and Michael Loomis at GPLA; Dave Hofmann at Keat-
                 ing Building Corp.; and Don Buenger and Elroy Sutherland at Urban Design Group. Image 9-8-3
                 courtesy of Urban Design Group, Inc. all other images courtesy of High Concrete Structures.




c09.indd 439                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:32 AM
          440 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                        9.9 HILLWOOD COMMERCIAL PROJECT
                                               BIM for Conceptual Cost Estimating

                                   9.9.1 Introduction
                                   This case study demonstrates the potential for building information models to
                                   support conceptual estimating early and often in a project and during the
                                   conceptual design and development phase. The use of parametric models by
                                   the design-builder, the Beck Group, showcases the benefits of providing
                                   informed design options to an owner early in the process and enabling both the
                                   owner and the design-build team to explore more options and, ultimately, to
                                   provide better overall design, in terms of programmatic and cost requirements.
                                        The project is located in the Victory area of downtown Dallas, TX on an
                                   old railroad yard that is currently under remediation in preparation for the
                                   Victory Park Development Project (www.victorypark.com), which includes an
                                   office-retail facility and several other buildings (See Figure 9-9-1). The owner
                                   and developer, Hillwood Development, plans to lease the retail and office
                                   space. The project was initiated in August 2006, with a lump-sum fee for
                                   design services provided by the Beck Group. As of March 2007, the project
                                   was in the schematic design phase, and lease discussions were in progress. This
                                   case study focuses on the two-month period of schematic design, when the
                                   conceptual estimating took place.



          FIGURE 9-9-1
          The project site shown
          in A) 3D project site
          rendering, B) 3D
          rendering of Victory
          project, C) 2D plan
          view in AutoCAD,
          and D) 3D conceptual
          rendering of building.




c09.indd 440                                                                                                    1/16/08 11:45:32 AM
                                                                                    9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project   441

               Table 9-9-1       Overview of project details.
                Developer               Hillwood

                Architect               Beck Group

                Lot size                1.6 acres

                Office Space            115,439 sf

                Retail Space            22,712 sf

                Parking Spaces          81

                Floors                  6




                   The project is a six-story 135,000 sf office/retail building on a 1.6 acre lot.
               The site involves unique constraints for vehicles and pedestrians, requiring
               accessibility changes due to the topography (See Figure 9-9-1). The Beck
               Group is predominantly a commercial builder with many repeat clients, and
               their services included conceptual estimating use of their propriety software.

               9.9.2 The Conceptual Estimating Process
               The Beck Group provides conceptual estimating as part of its standard services
               for architectural design. Based in Dallas, TX, the firm is a leading-edge design-
               builder on the forefront of using parametric-based CAD to support their design
               and building processes. In 2000, the Beck Group acquired intellectual prop-
               erty from the Parametric Technology Corporation (PTC) to better provide cus-
               tom design services. With a small full-time team devoted to the customization
               and enhancement of this technology, they were able to combine their expertise
               in design-build with that of PTC’s technology. Their initial efforts focused on
               supporting the quick exploration of different design options.
                    On this project, the Beck Group began the digital modeling effort as soon
               as the owner signed-off on the conceptual design and prior to the schematic
               design phase. The Beck Group’s architectural design team developed a concep-
               tual cost model and estimate while exploring multiple design revisions and
               evaluating the costs associated with each of the alternative features. The itera-
               tive process involved exploration of design alternatives, calculation of cost esti-
               mates, and presentation to the client. The participants were predominantly
               architects from the Beck Group and the construction project manager, who
               provided input and guidance on constructability issues and estimating and pre-
               construction services. Since the Beck Group is a design-build firm, they can




c09.indd 441                                                                                                          1/16/08 11:45:34 AM
          442 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               rely on internal knowledge. Members of both teams benefited from the multi-
                               disciplinary collaboration.

                               9.9.3 Overview of BIM Technology to Support
                                     Conceptual Estimating
                               The central tool employed is DProfiler, a BIM-based solution capable of gener-
                               ating accurate cost estimates from a digital design model. DProfiler is a 3D
                               parametric BIM tool that allowed the team to quickly generate a design based
                               on specific features, parametric variables, and custom design with parametric
                               components. The major enhancement within DProfiler, compared to other
                               building information modeling tools, is its association with cost information.
                                    As designers build a digital model using components from a building com-
                               ponent library, it is possible to view real-time cost information. Each compo-
                               nent is associated with cost items from a database. The DProfiler software
                               package is integrated with RSMeans cost data, which includes 18,000 assem-
                               blies and more than 180,000 line-items. RS Means is a cost construction data-
                               base provided by Reed Construction Data (see www.rsmeans.com for more
                               information). This association allowed the team to quickly calculate specific
                               features and design alternatives, allowing the owner and designer to also work
                               in real-time.
                                    Beck’s experience using DProfiler for estimating, compared to traditional
                               manual-based estimating, has resulted in a 92% time reduction in producing
                               an estimate with the digital estimating process; and an estimate with a 1%
                               delta from the manual estimate on similar projects. Consequently, the design
                               team can achieve the same results in far less time, with potentially more accu-
                               racy and the ability to explore more scenarios.

                               9.9.4 Overview of the BIM Estimating Process
                               Once the design team had developed an initial concept, the dedicated modeler
                               used DProfiler to create a parametric building model with links to cost items
                               (Figure 9-9-2). A critical first step involved entering the project information
                               including the project zip code. This allowed the team to account for regional
                               cost factors (See Figure 9-9-3). The modeler then selected the Building Type
                               that most closely resembled the project. The Building Type sets the project’s
                               default assumptions based on pre-defined parameters within the DProfiler
                               database. The Building Type is basically a roadmap that links additional building
                               components, for example, it used a template for an office building of 4-6 stories
                               that included cast-in-place concrete structures and slab assemblies commonly
                               found in this building type. Alternatively, an 8-24-story Apartment Tower with
                               a Steel Frame would include steel member components. These templates were




c09.indd 442                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:45:35 AM
                                                                                                                9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project   443

                                                                                                          Parametric, 3D model with
                                           RS Means                                                        associated cost estimate
                                           cost database
                                           DProfiler
                                                        Building Information Model
                      2D plan        Develop and               Cost estimate
               napkin sketches       model design
                                                                                            model
                                 A                                      Dprofiler       cost estimate
                                                                        Cost database      images
                                                                                        design criteria
                                                                                          Proforma
                                                             Evaluate estimate
                                      Architect/             for completeness
                                      Modeler
                                                         B

                                                                                        Present and
                                                                Architect/              review with
                                                                 Project                   owner
                                                                Manager             C

                                                              revisions
                                                                                          Owner
                                                                                        Design/Build
                                                                                           Team
                                     Iterate through multiple options



               FIGURE 9-9-2 Conceptual estimating workflow using DProfiler.
               It included: A) development and modeling of a design scenario using parametric building
               components and/or project templates; B) evaluation-based estimating using cost information
               associated with building components from a cost database, such as RS Means, with insight from
               an experienced designer and project manager; and C) presentation and review of the estimated
               design option, involving the owner and the design-build team. This entire process can be
               performed for multiple design scenarios.




               created based on the Beck Group’s input and experience in building similar
               projects, as were their other 23 project templates. Organizations can develop and
               modify such templates based on the types of facilities they design and build.
                    The modeler then lays out the project site and building based on an initial
               concept and using building components from the selected template. The mod-
               eler can import 2D plans and use them as an underlay to expedite the initial
               process. As the modeler creates the site or building mass, the summary data is
               updated in real-time, as shown in Figure 9-9-3.
                    Each of these components or assemblies is associated with cost items in the
               database. As the modeler adds detail to the model, the cost estimate updates
               in real-time and the modeler can view the estimated information, as shown in
               Figure 9-9-3. In this case, items are associated with information in the RS Means
               cost database, but creating custom line items or assemblies is also a possibility.
                    These costs include line items with rules for extracting parameters from
               the model’s components as well as for building components not represented
               geographically. For example, the slab assembly may include rules to account
               for a fire extinguisher and cabinet for every 2,500 sf of slab in the building.




c09.indd 443                                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:45:35 AM
          444 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-9-3
          Snapshot of DProfiler
          showing (A) Project
          Information,
          (B) Building Summary
          Data, (C) Parking
          Summary Data, and
          (D) Site and Site Usage
          Summary Data; and
          (E) showing a real-time
          cost estimate for the
          modeled design.
          The cost estimate
          includes overall and
          cost-per-square-
          foot as well as
          UniFormat Level I and
          II cost breakdowns.
          Alternatively, cost can
          be organized using the
          16 CSI (Construction
          Specification Institute)
          divisions.




                                     Additionally, cost line items can be associated with model parameters and vari-
                                     ables, such as overall project square footage. These types of variables can be
                                     used to calculate the costs associated with temporary services or other less
                                     tangible building items. Throughout the modeling process, the modeler can
                                     switch between 3D model views and a detailed cost view, as shown in
                                     Figure 9-9-4.
                                          It is important to note that the design and construction team must work
                                     together to identify such items and determine how to best incorporate them
                                     into the estimating template and components or assemblies.
                                          The modeling process may also involve the creation of a new component
                                     or assembly representing an uncommon or unique component. For example,
                                     the shading canopy components were created from scratch for this project.
                                     This involved creating the geometry and representing the component and its
                                     associated assembly item in the cost database.
                                          As the model is created, real-time information associated with the cost
                                     database becomes available. This type of information provides the designer with
                                     estimated costs for the current design alternative and gives the ability to associ-
                                     ate costs with specific design features.




c09.indd 444                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:35 AM
                                                                                                  9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project   445




               FIGURE 9-9-4 Snapshot of DProfiler’s detailed cost estimate showing the hierarchy and
               information.
               At the top of the tabular view are 11 model component tabs. Within these tabs, the Collections
               and Assemblies each contain individual Line Items from the cost database. In the example shown
               above, the slab component tab is selected and the 5th level (level five of the building) is expanded
               to include the Collections contained in that level. The Elevated Frame Assembly is also selected
               and expanded to reveal the Line Item contained within it.




               9.9.5 Design Alternatives That Were Evaluated
               The Beck design-build team also used DProfiler to run several what-if scenarios,
               once the initial design concept model and its associated estimate were found to
               be over budget and did not work within the owner’s Proforma framework (see
               Figure 9-9-5). The team evaluated multiple cost options, such as changing floor-
               to-floor heights, adding and removing a floor to increase or decrease square
               footage, relocating the garage component from below to above-grade, and eval-
               uating the current plan against a more rectilinear and potentially more efficient
               shape to determine the cost premium of the site constraints requiring them to
               utilize a less efficient plan and perimeter.
                    One design option included the use of a glazing frit film on the exterior
               window wall system, in lieu of constructing costly metal-panel eyebrow over-
               hangs to cope with direct solar exposure from the South and West angles.
               Figures 9-9-6 A and B show these two options. The team combined different
               options (whenever possible) and reviewed this information with the owner.




c09.indd 445                                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:45:36 AM
          446 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-9-5
          Screenshot of the
          DProfiler system,
          showing a 2D spatial
          view of the project, a
          3D view, the related
          Proforma (left corner
          view), and cost details
          (along the right side).




                                    FIGURE 9-9-6 A) Snapshot of the model, showing a design option with eyebrow canopies
                                    for shading the direct sun. B) Snapshot of the model, showing a design option with canopies
                                    removed that utilizes glazing frit instead.
                                    Glazing frit is a film applied to the interior of the glass and is not visible in the model.



                                        The team was capable of inputting the design variables directly into the
                                    owner’s financial Proforma (see Figure 9-9-5), such as for leasing square foot-
                                    age, but did not do so on this project. The potential advantage of linking the
                                    model directly with the Proforma is that real-time feedback then includes
                                    estimated building costs and operating income and expenses. While owners




c09.indd 446                                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:45:37 AM
                                                                                        9.9 Hillwood Commercial Project   447

               typically view this information as proprietary, the ability to rapidly evaluate
               design options based on real building parameters is invaluable. The DProfiler
               system provides capabilities to link model variables to spreadsheet variables
               and formulas in Microsoft Excel. In lieu of a direct link to the owner’s Pro-
               forma, the Beck team used a modified Proforma based on the owner’s input in
               order to evaluate the design options and observe how the increased or
               decreased square footage impacted the overall results. In response to these
               features, the owner said,

                   “By modeling the design options with pricing impacts, we were able to identify
                   the right products for this market. Potential tenants will have high demands,
                   and we have to provide both the right architecture and the right lease rates to
                   satisfy them.”



               9.9.7 Benefits Realized
               Conceptual stage cost estimating yields numerous benefits to the owner and the
               design team. These benefits include:
                    Reduction in Preconstruction/Estimating Labor-hours to Produce an
               Estimate. The reduction in hours came from two sources. First, the typical
               estimating process requires participation from personnel in the pre-construction
               team, which includes estimators and experienced construction project manag-
               ers. With DProfiler, an experienced member of the design team can produce an
               estimate with guidance and input from the project manager, thus reducing their
               time commitment and overall labor-hours required by the estimating team for
               the coordination effort. In a traditional setting, the same estimate would require
               more than one person to perform the same quantity takeoff and estimate in the
               same time frame. Second, DProfiler performs the tedious quantity takeoff
               process, greatly reducing the time required in a traditional approach.
                    Accurate Estimates in Real-time. The parametric model ensures takeoff
               accuracy by verifying that all items are counted and included, thus reducing the
               potential for estimating errors. Rapid feedback on cost allows the design team
               to focus on analyzing the financial impact of design changes, rather than evalu-
               ating the accuracy of the estimate.
                    Visual Representation of the Estimate. The cost estimate is represented
               graphically in the 3D model. This reduces potential errors and omissions caused
               by oversight from the cost estimator. For example, in traditional estimating the
               exterior wall cladding is quantified by calculating the square footage of the sur-
               face area. If an estimator fails to account for the entire wall area or otherwise
               omits a section, this area will not be calculated. With DProfiler, if a modeler is
               missing an area of exterior wall cladding, it becomes apparent in the 3D graphic.




c09.indd 447                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:45:38 AM
          448 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               In other words, the slab area is a parametric value, meaning that the model cal-
                               culates its area based on its inherent geometry. The slab is also represented
                               graphically, therefore making it possible to see the slab visually in its geometric
                               form. Because the cost estimate is directly linked to physical components in the
                               model, it is nearly impossible to have a component in the model without an
                               associated cost or vice versa, to have a cost in the estimate not represented by
                               a physical component in the model. For example, the modeler found an area of
                               extra square footage within the building that was not as obvious in the 2D plan
                               and building sections. In response to this, the owner said,

                                   “Using this software offered us the advantage of being able to get the informa-
                                   tion we needed about the total project cost and simultaneously be able to have
                                   visual documentation of what that cost represented.”


                               9.9.8 Conclusion
                               Conceptual estimating early in the design process yields potentially significant
                               benefits to the owner and design-build team. This case study shows how an
                               organization, over several years, adapted their design process to take advantage
                               of BIM technologies to better serve their clients and produce more cost effec-
                               tive designs that are better aligned with owner requirements. Achieving these
                               benefits required:

                                   • Experienced designers and project managers who could provide invalu-
                                     able insight into the digital estimating process. There is a common mis-
                                     perception that these types of new technologies are intelligent solutions
                                     and powerful tools that allow younger and less experienced employees
                                     to be more productive. This case study demonstrates that use of the
                                     tool by skilled and knowledgeable employees with field experience, who
                                     understand the assemblies and complexities associated with construct-
                                     ing a building, is immensely valuable. In many cases, these tools require
                                     more intelligent input to yield efficiencies and quality in the output.
                                   • Investing time and effort earlier in the process to properly train employ-
                                     ees in using the software.
                                   • Customizing the database to fit an organization’s standard estimating
                                     processes. As organizations adopt these types of conceptual estimat-
                                     ing tools, significant up-front investment is required to translate the
                                     estimating rules and methods to model variables, parameters, and model
                                     component properties or attributes. Over time, this up-front investment
                                     will decrease substantially for similar types of projects. This may involve
                                     developing a standard method to associate building components with




c09.indd 448                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:38 AM
                                                                         9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi   449

                     cost items using industry formats, such as UniFormat fields or a custom
                     property that can be easily associated with items in the cost database.
                   • Cooperation of the owner or client to provide proforma templates or
                     spreadsheets for evaluating and analyzing the estimated information.
                     Linking these templates to the spreadsheets removes another step in the
                     process and provides the owner with the tools to view the estimate, not
                     just in terms of construction costs but in terms of its impact on operat-
                     ing expenses and income.



                 Acknowledgments for Hillwood Commercial Project
                 The authors are indebted to Brent Pilgrim, Stewart Carroll, and Betsy del Monte of the Beck Group
                 for their assistance in providing the information for this case study. Additionally, we would like to
                 thank Ken Reese, Executive Vice President with Hillwood for his comments and support for the case
                 study. All figures used in this case study were provided courtesy of the Beck Group and Hillwood
                 Development.



                  9.10 U. S. COURTHOUSE, JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI
                           BIM to enhance architectural design and delivery, as part of
                           GSA’s BIM Program
               This case study reviews an ongoing project and early participant in the General
               Services Administration’s (GSA) 3D and 4D BIM demonstration projects. It
               outlines a sequence of early applications of advanced IT and BIM technologies
               that served to advance this project and more generally to explore effective uti-
               lization of advanced information technologies on large federal projects.
                    The Jackson Mississippi Courthouse has gone through multiple phases of
               congressional review and funding. It will have taken approximately a decade from
               the start of initial planning through to occupancy. The planning, design, and con-
               struction of the Jackson Courthouse are managed by the GSA, the agency that
               develops facilities for various federal agencies. The building will be leased to
               other branches of the federal government; in this case the US Courts are the pri-
               mary tenant. Another occupant of courthouses is the US Marshals Service, which
               provides security for prisoners and for the facility. Courthouses often include
               leases with additional federal occupants.
                    The Jackson Mississippi Courthouse is approximately 400,000 sf with six
               stories above grade and two below. It includes twelve district, bankruptcy,
               and magistrate courtrooms and a grand jury space. Federal courthouses have




c09.indd 449                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:45:38 AM
          450 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               elaborate building programs that reflect best practices learned from over a
                               century of experience. A main repository of this knowledge is the US Courts
                               Design Guide (1997). A major factor of all federal courthouses is the require-
                               ment for three distinct circulation systems: for the public, for judges, juries and
                               staff, and for the defendants.
                                    The courthouse is located about a mile from the Mississippi State Capital
                               building with both on axis with East Capital Street. The design was conceived to
                               reflect this relationship and not upstage the center of state government. Civic
                               buildings in downtown Jackson are often enclosed by a monumental green space.
                               These ‘greens,’ established in 1822, are the only vestiges of Thomas Jefferson’s
                               “checkerboard plan” which alternated squares for urban development with
                               squares for public use. The design is conceived around a central rotunda that is
                               the inverse or reflection of the capital dome.
                                    Over its long tenure, the Jackson Courthouse has been used as a test bed
                               for several different BIM technologies. These have included:

                                   • Use of virtual reality for user assessment (see Figure 4-7)
                                   • Early use of BIM on a large project with emphasis on early integration
                                     of design teams
                                   • As a platform to integrate cost estimating
                                   • As a test bed for automated design guide checking.

                                   Some of these trials are still ongoing. In this case study, an overview of the
                               project is followed by an explanation of each of the IT and BIM applications
                               according to their sequence of use in the project.


                               9.10.1 H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture LLC and
                                      the Jackson Mississippi Courthouse
                               In 1999, H3 (H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture LLC) received the plan-
                               ning commission for the Jackson Mississippi Federal Courthouse. In 2002,
                               funds for the design phase were awarded to H3. At this time, the Estimated
                               Total Project Cost (ETPC) was $68 to $78 million. The project was to follow
                               the Design-Bid-Build (DBB) process. The cost of design and construction were
                               included in the ETPC.
                                   For subcontracting in August of 2002, the United States General Services
                               Administration (GSA) held a “Small Business Subcontracting Networking Ses-
                               sion” for prospective small business subcontractors and consultants involved
                               in the courthouse’s design phase Other major participants in the design and
                               construction team are shown in Table 9-10-1. Jacobs Engineering Group was




c09.indd 450                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:45:39 AM
                                                                                 9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi     451

                                                                                                                FIGURE 9-10-1
                                                                                                                Front facade and
                                                                                                                entrance to the
                                                                                                                Jackson Mississippi
                                                                                                                Courthouse.
                                                                                                                Images courtesy of H3
                                                                                                                Architects, rendering by
                                                                                                                Eric Schuldenfrei.




               Table 9-10-1       Fact sheet for the Jackson Mississippi Federal Courthouse
                Hard Facts

                Project                       Federal Courthouse

                Location                      Jackson Mississippi

                Client                        General Services Administration

                Architect                     H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture, LLC

                BIM Consultant                Ghafari Associates, LLC

                Contract Type                 Design-bid-build

                Construction Manager          Jacobs Engineering Group, Inc.

                General Contractor            Yates Construction Company

                Structural Engineers          Walter P. Moore (Structural)

                Mechanical Engineers          Cooke Douglass Farr Lemons (CDFL) (Mechanical/Plumbing)

                Software Consultants          Contractors

                Neutral Formats               IFC

                BIM Areas                     Virtual reality design review, 3D BIM Collaboration, integrated
                                              cost estimation, design guide review

                Area                          400,000 sf

                Duration                      seven years (est.)

                Cost                          $122 million




c09.indd 451                                                                                                                      1/16/08 11:45:39 AM
          452 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                                  contracted for construction management; the Yates Construction Company
                                  was hired as the general contractor; Walter P. Moore was selected as the struc-
                                  tural engineer; Watkins and O’Gwynn was selected as the electrical engineer;
                                  and Cooke Douglass Farr Lemons (CDFL) was selected as the mechanical/
                                  plumbing contractor.
                                       The project timeline is shown in Figure 9-10-2, marking the times when var-
                                  ious activities were undertaken: the virtual reality study by Arup, BIM software
                                  review and selection, training on Revit, and other activities that are reported in
                                  this case study.

                                  9.10.2 Virtual Reality Use in Courtroom Design
                                  As the GSA BIM program was just being initiated in late 2003, they launched
                                  a pilot project to explore the use of 3D visualization in courtroom design.
                                  Courtrooms are the primary public stage for many life-affecting dramas.
                                  They are also the center of action for federal judges, who are granted lifetime
                                  appointments. In most courthouses a judge is assigned to a courtroom where
                                  most of his or her cases are heard. Not only does the US Courts Design
                                  Guide include extensive criteria, but federal judges are often actively involved
                                  in the design and detailing of “their” courtrooms. A judge may voice prefer-
                                  ences for room geometries and the placement of elements, such as the bench,
                                  counsel tables, jury box, and witness stand. In the past, it has been common
                                  practice for courtrooms to be mocked up at full scale in plywood, with loca-
                                  tions for all of the major actors, fenestration, and lighting, to allow for the
                                  assessment of a courtroom before building it for real. These mock-ups cost in
                                  the range of $50,000 or more.
                                      The GSA team retained Ove Arup and Associates to undertake multi-
                                  dimensional virtual reality simulation and modeling. A visualization model was
                                  developed by H3 staff and students from the Center for Integrated Facilities
                                  Engineering (CIFE) at Stanford University. The Computer Automated Virtual



          FIGURE 9-10-2
          Time table for
          development and
          implementation of BIM
          Pilot program.




c09.indd 452                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:45:41 AM
                                                                        9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi   453

               Environment (CAVE) at Walt Disney Imagineering was used to mock up a
               courtroom to stereoscopically reproduce a full size representation of the room
               in semi-wraparound fashion. The judges wished to visualize the project’s sight-
               lines and materials from different critical courtroom locations. Because the
               CAVE did not provide complete immersion, the sightline reviews were only
               partially successful. Through this exercise, judges’ feedback resulted in several
               changes to the courtroom’s design, including lowering the view-blocking rail
               on the top of the judge’s bench. The CAVE sessions also resolved where the
               counsel tables would be located.
                    To validate the design’s acoustic characteristics, the GSA relied on a 3D
               sound model created by Arup Acoustics, based on the courtroom’s geometry
               and planned materials. By electronically transforming sounds in a manner that
               replicated the geometry and materials, they tested judges in a sound lab accu-
               rate simulation of speech from different parts of the courtroom in relation to
               various seating locations. These were also compared to the reverberation and
               intelligibility measures that had been documented in other existing court-
               rooms with good and poor sound characteristics. Several speech obscuring
               aspects were found and rectified. Revisions included changing some surface




                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-10-3
                                                                                                      The Jackson Mississippi
                                                                                                      Virtual Courtroom.
                                                                                                      Images courtesy of H3.




c09.indd 453                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:45:42 AM
          454 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               shapes and adding sound-absorbing materials to reduce the reverberation time
                               and improve speech intelligibility. Arup Acoustics applied metrics regarding
                               the cost of the analysis using a 3D model, as opposed to the usual plywood
                               mock up. http://www.arup.com/americas/project.cfm?pageid=6708
                                    Working closely with the client and design team, Arup optimized the
                               design to balance reverberation and clarity of speech. The SoundLab also pro-
                               vided an environment in which all the design and client team members could
                               experience the courtroom’s acoustics and make collaborative decisions quickly
                               and efficiently. ARUP estimates that the whole process can be conducted for
                               approximately 40% less than the cost of a physical mock-up.
                                    The third simulation effort dealt with lighting. The goal was to assess the
                               planned lighting in relation to materials and surfaces based on luminance,
                               using Radiance, developed at Lawrence Berkeley Labs. Several hot spots that
                               resulted in too high contrast ratios were identified, resulting in some material
                               and color changes. Paul Marantz, the project’s lighting designer and a partner
                               of Fisher Marantz Stone of New York, noted some intrinsic limitations of the
                               virtual-reality process for lighting analysis. These included contrast ratios that
                               can be seen by the human eye but are not visible in a virtual environment, due
                               to the intensity limitations of digital projection technology. Consequently, the
                               mock-up failed to show some shadows and highlights in the 3D environment
                               that people would normally see in a real room. But lighting isn’t usually evalu-
                               ated in the plywood courtroom mock-up, so Marantz felt that the lighting
                               experience was valuable. “We were able to fix a half-dozen issues, none of
                               which were fatal. It gave us the opportunity to improve the design,” Paul
                               Marantz said (Architectural Record 2005).
                                    Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer noted that a courtroom is to pro-
                               mote a conversation between plaintiff and defendant. Key design issues that
                               were essential to the judges that participated in the virtual mockup of the Jack-
                               son project involved room lighting, visual sight lines, room acoustics and how
                               these enhanced communication among all parties. The judges felt virtual real-
                               ity was a useful tool and several design issues were found and fixed as a result
                               of the simulation study. Changes to the courtroom design were then integrated
                               into the 2D early Design Development drawings.


                               9.10.3 Exploratory Application of the GSA BIM Program
                               In late 2003, the General Services Administration’s (GSA) Public Buildings
                               Service’s (PBS) Office of the Chief Architect (OCA) established the National
                               3D/4D-BIM Program. This program was undertaken to advance the ability of
                               US construction companies to provide better value for government projects.




c09.indd 454                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:45:44 AM
                                                                       9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi   455

               Since the program’s initiation in 2004, its achievements have been featured in
               a number of professional publications and have been positively received by the
               international community (e.g., International Alliance of Interoperability,
               the Workplace Network, and AIA TAP BIM Awards).
                   In 2005, GSA and H3 agreed to explore the use of BIM tools in the Jackson
               Mississippi Courthouse project. GSA offered H3 an opportunity to assess
               BIM technology and to review its merits and limitations. GSA provided con-
               sultation to advise the new users and offered guidelines for adopting new
               technologies:

                   • Develop a building model of the new Jackson Courthouse for use in the
                     coordination of architectural and engineering disciplines.
                   • Develop Real Estate Assignment Plan square footage tabulations for each
                     of the courthouse tenants. The accuracy of these figures is important as
                     they establish the amount of rent paid to GSA by each tenant.
                   • Apply quantity surveying and estimating in conjunction with conven-
                     tional construction estimates.
                   • Produce a set of consistent 2D Construction Documents.
                   • To serve later as a basis for integration with shop models and drawings.
                   • To be used in 4D construction planning and sequences.

                    While the courthouse project was in Design Development, H3 spent
               eight months carrying out a selection process to determine which software
               suite was to be used. They used a multi-stage question and interview process
               for four potential software vendors: Autodesk, Bentley, Graphisoft, and
               Gehry Technologies. H3 performed initial investigations to identify the four
               invited vendors. A proposal request and questionnaire was distributed to the
               selected vendors based on the GSA’s building information modeling services
               scope document and questions formulated by H3. To aid them in this task,
               H3 hired Ghafari Associates as consultants. Responses to the questionnaire
               were used to narrow the selection to two vendors (Autodesk and Graph-
               isoft), who were invited to participate in a day-long interview and modeling
               demonstration for the project team (H3 and primary consultants) and
               the GSA.
                    The final selection of Revit Building (for use by H3), Revit Structure (for
               use by Walter P. Moore), and Architectural Building Systems (for use by CDFL)
               was based on a combination of software evaluation, costs, and services provided
               in the vendor proposals, among other factors. In addition to the above selec-
               tion, NavisWorks was evaluated and selected as a software partner to provide




c09.indd 455                                                                                                         1/16/08 11:45:44 AM
          456 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               “collaboration and coordination” software to be used by all members of the
                               design team.
                                    One of the major risks involved in the adoption of BIM technologies was
                               the concern that it simply would not work. H3 was concerned that the whole
                               BIM concept of documentation and data extraction based on a 3D model would
                               not meet their requirements. Another issue was the time conflict between the
                               team’s learning process and the project schedule of document production. To
                               effectively produce documents based on the 3D model, their team would
                               require a knowledge level that would take time to acquire.
                                    Soon after the software adoption process, in April, 2006, a decision was
                               made to switch from reinforced concrete to steel for the upper level structural
                               system. The switch was based on analysis by the CM indicating that a steel struc-
                               ture would reduce the construction schedule by 5 months. This change affected
                               the structural frame from the second floor framing up to the roof. The first floor
                               frame and columns and the lower parking levels and foundations remained as
                               structural in-situ concrete. The change shortened the contractor’s General Con-
                               ditions requirements for construction activities, resulting in significant savings.
                               A directive from the GSA for this change led to a complete redesign by the
                               structural engineer, Walter P. Moore.


                               9.10.4 BIM Design Integration
                               H3 originally managed the project’s content and the structure of the design
                               team’s files and folders in the original 2D development phases. The adoption
                               of BIM in the middle of the project led to the decision to utilize a hybrid 2D
                               and 3D BIM approach. This was based on multiple factors, including:

                                   • Existing project drawing data that did not have to be modeled in the
                                     building model. (i.e., standard details)
                                   • Interim schedule constraints and requirements that conflicted with
                                     training and the ongoing learning curve required to become proficient
                                     with the new software.
                                   • Existing contractual relationships with sub-consultants that were
                                     initially not part of the BIM pilot due to funding limits. Non-BIM sub-
                                     consultants worked with conventional 2D CAD and referenced ‘back-
                                     ground’ drawing data extracted from the building model.
                                   • Project team members who (for various reasons) did not adapt to the BIM
                                     software tools and continued working in conventional 2D software.
                                   • The principal BIM participants were Architecture (H3), Mechanical and
                                     Plumbing (CDFL), and Structural (WPM) consultants.




c09.indd 456                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:45:45 AM
                                                                         9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi     457

               The document production plan using the hybrid BIM approach is shown in
               Figure 9-10-4. It shows those drawing sets that are produced entirely in 3D
               BIM, those produced in 2D AutoCAD, and those that are a mixture of 3D mass-
               ing and 2D detail infill. Information flow from the three principal BIM users—
               architects, structural designers, and MEP engineers—into derived drawings is
               outlined.
                    To achieve strong levels of design collaboration, a central coordination
               server using Bentley ProjectWise was set up for internet access at Jacobs Engi-
               neering Group, the project construction manager. All participants in the BIM
               process were given explicitly defined roles, including different levels of author-
               ization to access the building model. In general, every participant has authoriza-
               tion to edit their part of the project and reference other parts. The original H3
               site existed as the central drawing repository prior to the BIM pilot, and its
               structure became the BIM pilot’s on the server. It provided the structure for the
               BIM data (original and extracted reference data) as well as all conventional 2D
               drawing data from consultants.
                    The higher level server was structured according to systems, as shown in
               Figure 9-10-5, allowing for version management. In the 2D conventional early


                                                                                                       FIGURE 9-10-4
                                                                                                       Drawing production
                                                                                                       responsibilities in the
                                                                                                       hybrid approach.




c09.indd 457                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:45:45 AM
          458 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

          FIGURE 9-10-5
          High level structure
          of project files on the
          FTP site.
          This site carried the
          project files for all
          3D and 2D systems.




                                    phases of the project, design participants were responsible for specific 2D
                                    drawings. In BIM, however, drawings are reports extracted from the building
                                    model. Because of the cross linkage of objects within a parametric model, the
                                    architectural model in Revit is a single large file. In order to manage multiple
                                    users’ concurrent access to parts of the model, Revit supports projects being
                                    divided into worksets (as opposed to plans, sections, and elevations). Worksets
                                    define volumes of space and the project information within it. In this case, the
                                    project was partitioned into floors and East and West wings (2–6), roof, exte-
                                    rior, rotunda, and parking.




c09.indd 458                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:45:46 AM
                                                                        9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi    459

                    The building model developed for this courthouse was one of the largest
               projects attempted on the Revit platform during this time period. There were
               three models: the architectural model, the structural model and the mechani-
               cal/plumbing model. Together, they included details of each courtroom’s
               layout, the structural system and much of the ductwork and piping (see
               Figure 9-10-6). The architectural model is largest and includes some of the
               other elements. For some uses, the architectural model became too large to
               deal with in a single file, leading to interaction problems. Various partitioning
               strategies were attempted, including the one set up for the server. Through
               experience, they found that project files over 250 megabytes in size were to be
               avoided. While trying to maximize the benefits of BIM, H3’s challenge was to
               decide what to model and what to detail using 2D sections (See Sec. 2.2.3).
               For instance, many repeated standard details were modeled in 2D to limit 3D
               complexity. Also, features like site plan and details were also excluded. These
               were new model management issues for the architects at H3.
                    The architects, structural engineers, and MEP engineers all worked through
               construction level models to produce construction documents using BIM.
               Bi-weekly online meetings were held using Webex conferencing, and Navis-
               Works software was used to review the model’s current status and intervene
               where needed. Some adjustments were required for NavisWorks to manage
               the data with Revit’s worksets. Many spatial conflicts were discovered and



                                                                                                      FIGURE 9-10-6
                                                                                                      Multiple images of
                                                                                                      layout conflicts caught
                                                                                                      in the bi-weekly review
                                                                                                      meetings, using
                                                                                                      NavisWorks.
                                                                                                      Images courtesy of H3.




c09.indd 459                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:45:46 AM
          460 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               corrected. Some of the problem reports generated during those meeting are
                               shown in Figure 9-10-6. NavisWorks was able to deal with the full model.

                               9.10.5 Integrating Cost Estimation with BIM
                               Due to the length of time required of most federal projects and the inevitable
                               inflation of construction materials and labor, cost estimation and controls are a
                               necessary component of such work. As a result, the GSA was interested in sup-
                               porting the use of BIM-integrated cost estimation. They arranged for an Atlanta-
                               based software company, U.S. Cost, to create an integrated approach using this
                               project as a test case.
                                    On this project, the cost estimation team used a hybrid BIM estimating
                               approach that included automatic takeoff from the building model and a direct
                               link of the takeoff data into Excel, and then to U.S. Cost (see Section 6.6).
                               To elaborate, the team used a plug-in developed by U.S. Cost to extract takeoff
                               information at the component level. They associated cost item tags with assem-
                               bly items via a component property. This takeoff data was then exported via
                               ODBC to an Excel spreadsheet.
                                    In this case, the estimates are for future material procurement. In order to
                               cross-check these estimates, the plan was to generate multiple estimates. Figure
                               9-10-7 represents how different cost estimates could be used for comparison.
                               The multiple estimates by different teams, based on different information struc-
                               tures (Masterformat, Uniformat) were to serve as the basis for comparison.
                               Originally, the manual cost tracking was planned to consist of nine estimates at
                               three stages of completion, by H3 (Architecture), Jacobs (Construction Manager),
                               Yates (Construction Company), and at the end by GSA (Developer). The revised
                               automated estimating plan was changed to consist of six estimates: three BIM-
                               based estimates by U.S. Cost and three by Yates (reconciled by Jacobs). This was
                               the plan.
                                    Initially, the team attempted to generate estimating data for the whole
                               project, using the architectural model. That model, however, was too large to
                               be used. To reduce the size of the 280 megabyte project file, various attempts
                               were made to split the model into different parts that could be handled in a
                               productive way. Finally, the team ended up using only the structural model
                               provided by Walter P. Moore and estimating quantities and costs of the steel
                               and concrete structure. This 80 megabyte file worked acceptably with the US
                               Cost plug-in.
                                    The bidder’s manual structural cost estimates were significantly larger
                               then those derived automatically from the model. Upon inspection, the man-
                               ual estimator provided extra material for waste, while the system optimized
                               the cut-member lengths against standard shop lengths. Because connection




c09.indd 460                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:45:47 AM
                                                                          9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi    461

                                                                                                        FIGURE 9-10-7
                                                                                                        The original cost
                                                                                                        estimating plan (A) and
                                                                                                        the revised one (B).
                                                                                                        The original plan
                                                                                                        involved nine estimates.
                                                                                                        The revised schedule
                                                                                                        relied on six – three
                                                                                                        BIM-based ones by
                                                                                                        U.S. Cost, to be cross-
                                                                                                        checked with three by
                                                                                                        Yates.




               details were missing, these aspects of the estimate were also initially ignored.
               The structural material bill of material was defined in metric units, which
               introduced a further conversion factor. In addition, GSA generally uses the
               ASTM version of Uniformat that is slightly different from that provided by
               the Construction Specifications Institute (CSI).
                    US Cost offers automatic takeoff plug-ins for Revit and extraction of take-
               off information from an IFC model.
                    A complex situation triggered one of the innovations in this project. The
               GSA was required to have a 1% tolerance in the total gross area of the project
               in relation to the number established by the building program. Because this is a
               small and difficult target to maintain, the team decided that the best approach
               would be to extract these quantities from the BIM model. This way, they would
               have a better understanding of the floor areas in comparison with the program,
               and they could keep a ‘real time’ check on the areas and spaces within the project.
               This required careful setup of the model and its data. Relying on the numbers
               extracted directly from the model meant that no rooms could be left unlabeled
               or unaccounted for.




c09.indd 461                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:45:47 AM
          462 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               9.10.6 Design Guide Validation
                               When the Jackson Courthouse was at 65% construction documents (CDs), the
                               architects were asked to allow the building model to be used to support a new
                               GSA BIM initiative. It was stated at the beginning of this case study that extensive
                               criteria were applied from the U.S. Courts Design Guide (1997). This Guide is
                               maintained by the US Courts as a summary of best practices gained during more
                               than a century of courthouse design and operation. Currently, manual checking
                               of candidate designs against the design guide is both very time consuming and
                               inevitably incomplete. Errors that are supposed to be caught at the concept design
                               stage are often not identified until much later. Many of the guide’s requirements
                               are security driven; the U.S. Marshals Service spends man-months or more
                               reviewing designs regarding security, communication, and emergency issues.
                                    In October, 2006, the GSA contracted Georgia Tech to develop a proto-
                               type implementation of a Court Design Guide Validation Tool. One of the
                               goals of the Design Guide Validation project was to facilitate the checking of a
                               courthouse concept design to identify issues early for easy correction. The GSA
                               Design Guide Validation is based on the availability of a neutral building model
                               representation. The only such public domain representation is Industry Foun-
                               dation Classes (IFC), which is discussed at some length in Chapter 3. Any BIM
                               design tool qualified for use by GSA must be able to export an IFC building
                               model that is structured to support such testing.
                                    One of the fundamental aspects addressed in the existing design guide is
                               circulation layout, dealing with the three separate and disjoint circulation routes:
                               one for the public, another for the judge, jury and court staff, and the last for
                               prisoners and defendants. The guide also addresses ease of use and directness of
                               access. For the first phase of the validation project, the Georgia Tech team*
                               extracted over 300 rules from the guide that dealt with passage between spaces.
                               Since these rules were written in terms of space types—there were twelve court-
                               rooms and over 300 separate spaces in the Jackson Courthouse—and because
                               there are multiple paths between the same two spaces, the set of rules expanded
                               to almost 50,000 different circulation paths to be examined.
                                    In order to apply these rules, a building model must contain appropriate
                               content and structure. The structure is straightforward, listed in Table 9-10-2.
                                    All spaces must be defined consistently with the definition of IfcSpace to
                               represent the volume and named in a manner consistent with the way the rules



                               *The Georgia Tech GSA Design Guide Team was led by Chuck Eastman and includes Yeon-Suk

                               Jeong, post doctoral research scientist, and Ph.D. students Jaemin Lee, Jin Kook Lee, Hugo
                               Sheward, and Sherif AdbulMohsen.




c09.indd 462                                                                                                                1/16/08 11:45:48 AM
                                                                              9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi    463

               Table 9-10-2    Required entities to be carried in the GSA BIM Circulation Validation View.
                Modeling      IFC Entity Name                                           Description

                Space         IfcSpace          Spaces are bounded by walls or virtual walls.
                                                Space names should be defined on the basis of space naming conventions. (See Court-
                                                house naming conventions).

                Security      IfcZone           Security zone should be one of “public,”“restricted,” and “secure.” A zone for each
                Zone                            security level is defined and associated with spaces having that security level.

                Door          IfcDoor           There is no special requirement.

                Stairs        IfcStair          A stair must be defined as an IFC stair entity.
                                                A stair should be contained in a space.

                Ramp          IfcRamp           A ramp must be defined as an IFC ramp entity.
                                                A ramp should be contained in a space like stairs.

                Elevator      IfcSpace          Currently, elevator objects are defined through a space name. For example, “judges
                                                elevator” or “prisoner elevator.”

                Wall          IfcWall,          There is no special requirement.
                              IfcCurtainWall




               are defined. The space names were extracted from the design guide rule-set, and
               all synonyms were merged to a single name. These names also had to be inte-
               grated with GSA STAR rental space categories. The development of a general
               set of standard space names consumed several months, for Georgia Tech, the
               US Courts, and the GSA.
                    Each space must also have a security type designation, which was origi-
               nally defined using property-sets, an easy way to add data to an IFC object. In
               addition, stairs, ramps and elevators had to be defined, not just geometrically
               but as IfcStair or IfcRamp objects, and as an elevator space. This way, the soft-
               ware could identify them and access their attributes.
                    While these rules seem straightforward, they imposed conditions where
               none existed previously. Moreover, the size of the Jackson Courthouse model
               was such that it was difficult to operate. The IFC export capability could not
               function on the full model. Only through careful rebuilding of the courthouse
               model by GA Tech could the rules be effectively applied.
                    After developing the names, renaming all spaces, and rebuilding most of the
               Jackson Courthouse model so that it carried just the information needed for cir-
               culation tests, the model was reduced to about 28 megabytes. The path traver-
               sals reviewed by the plug-in take less than a minute to execute the 50,000 paths.




c09.indd 463                                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:45:48 AM
          464 Chapter 9 BIM Case Studies

                               The test results showed that several minor aspects of the design guide were not
                               followed. While these test results came along too late for effective correction, it
                               showed that such testing could be done effectively and reliably. The rigor and
                               care required in the definition of the model to support these tests was also a new
                               experience.

                               9.10.7 Lessons Learned
                               Because the project is still in the Construction Documents Phase, it is too early
                               to survey any metrics that could give us a comparison between this project and
                               previous similar projects done by the GSA or H3. In addition, the project was
                               used as a test-bed in ways that are not likely to be replicated.
                                    While the virtual reality review of the courtrooms was not the direct result
                               of BIM, it provides an example of effective client involvement facilitated by
                               BIM (as described in Chapter 4). We expect this kind of virtual review of both
                               spatial and environmental parameters to increase with the availability of build-
                               ing models. But as we move beyond raw simulation capabilities, the accuracy
                               of those simulations become important. In this case, lighting and visual simula-
                               tion limitations were noted and some strong benefits were reported from the
                               acoustic simulation.
                                    In adopting BIM partway through the project, H3 knew that this project
                               was going to have a steep learning curve for their firm but they also expected
                               that the effort would later increase their productivity on similar projects. The
                               fact that some consultants and team members still relied on conventional 2D
                               drawings led to a hybrid approach for document generation, requiring careful
                               management of 2D and 3D versions.
                                    The Jackson Courthouse design team, including H3, Walter P Moore and
                               CDFL, tried to make maximum use of BIM capabilities and developed an
                               impressively detailed model. But even with reasonably configured PCs, such
                               an endeavor today requires careful methods of modeling to minimize model
                               size, which the team only learned by experience as they proceeded. We nor-
                               mally think of design as a process that continuously adds detail to the base
                               design. This project, however, involved removing data from the model, which
                               became more critical as the quantity and level of detail of the information in
                               the model increased and became more complex.
                                    Another general challenge in BIM exemplified in this project involves inte-
                               grating other software to make use of the building model data, such as cost
                               estimating and automatic design guide checking packages. Each application
                               has specialized data requirements that must be harmonized with the others
                               and with careful definition of specific model constructs. This goes beyond get-
                               ting the model or drawings to “look right” and imposes general information




c09.indd 464                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:45:49 AM
                                                                          9.10 U. S. Courthouse, Jackson, Mississippi   465

               and structure requirements on the building model itself. These requirements
               are best defined early in the project, so that iterative rebuilding of the model is
               not required.
                   This project highlighted some of the challenges associated with being an
               early adopter and outlined issues that other firms should anticipate when under-
               taking new applications of BIM technology.



                 Acknowledgments
                 This case study was written by Eliel de la Cruz and Haldun Kececigil for Professor Chuck East-
                 man in a course offered by the Design Computing Ph.D. program in the College of Architecture
                 at Georgia Institute of Technology, Winter 2006. It has been adapted for use in this book. The
                 authors wish to acknowledge the assistance of H3 Architects and GSA District Four in the prepara-
                 tion of this study.




c09.indd 465                                                                                                            1/16/08 11:45:49 AM
              Glossary

              Building Data Model
              An object schema suitable for representing a building. A building data model
              may be used to represent schemas for file exchange, for XML-based web
              exchange, or to define a database schema for a repository. The main examples
              of building data models are IFC and CIS/2.
              Building Element Model (BEM)
              A digital representation of a building product that can be inserted and used in
              a BIM tool or other application that utilizes integrated product information.
              Building Information Modeling (BIM)
              We use BIM as a verb or an adjective phrase to describe tools, processes and
              technologies that are facilitated by digital, machine-readable documentation
              about a building, its performance, its planning, its construction and later its
              operation. Therefore BIM describes an activity, not an object. To describe the
              result of the modeling activity, we use the term ‘building information model’,
              or more simply ‘building model’ in full.
              Building Model
              A digital, machine-readable record of a building, its performance, its planning,
              its construction and later its operation. A Revit® model or a Digital Project™
              model of a building are examples of building models. ‘Building model’ can be
              considered the next-generation replacement for ‘construction drawings’, or
              ‘architectural drawings’. Downstream in the process, the term ‘fabrication
              model’ is already in common use as a replacement for ‘shop drawings’.
              Building model repository
              A building model repository is a database system whose schema is based on a
              published object based format. It is different from existing project data man-
              agement (PDM) systems and web-based project management systems in that
              the PDM systems are file based, and carry CAD and analysis package project
              files. Building model repositories are object-based, allowing query, transfer,
              updating and management of individual project objects from a potentially het-
              erogeneous set of applications.


              BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
              Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                  467



bgloss.indd 467                                                                                                                   12/17/07 8:16:53 PM
          468 Glossary

                         Building objects
                         Building objects are the things or parts that make up a building. Objects can
                         be aggregated into higher level objects, such as ‘Assemblies’; assemblies are
                         also objects. More generally, an object is any unit of a building that has proper-
                         ties associated with it. Thus the spaces in a building are also objects. In parts
                         of the text, element or component is used as a synonym for object.
                         BIM application
                         A specific use of a building information model to support a work process or
                         work task by the project team.
                         BIM process
                         A process that relies on the information generated by a BIM design tool for
                         analysis, fabrication detailing, cost estimation, scheduling, or other use.
                         BIM system
                         A software system that incorporates a BIM design tool and other applications
                         that utilize the BIM data. The system may be connected through a local area
                         network or the Internet.
                         BIM tool
                         A software application used to generate and manipulate building information
                         models. The term can be further qualified to denote specific application areas.
                         For example, ‘BIM Design Tool’ is often used to refer to tools used primarily
                         for architectural design, such as Revit® Building, Bentley Architecture, Digital
                         Project™ and ArchiCAD®.
                         Interoperability
                         The ability of BIM tools from multiple vendors to exchange building model
                         data and operate on that data. Interoperability is a significant requirement for
                         team collaboration.
                         Model server
                         See Building model repository.




bgloss.indd 468                                                                                         12/17/07 8:16:54 PM
               Bibliography
               ACM (1969–1982). Annual Design Automation Conferences, ACM New York.
               AGC (2006). The Contractors’ Guide to Building Information Modeling, Asso-
                   ciated General Contractors of America. Arlington, VA.
               AIA (1994). The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice Washington,
                   DC, AIA Document B162, American Institute of Architects.
               AISC (2007). AISC Design Guide, 20 vols. 2007 Edition, AISC Chicago, Ill.
               Akintoye, A., and E. Fitzgerald (2000). “A survey of current cost estimating
                   practices in the UK,” Construction Management & Economics 18(2):
                   161–172.
               Alberti, L. B. (1987). The Ten Books of Architecture: The 1755 Leoni Edition.
                   New York, (Paperback) Dover Press.
               Anderl, R., and R. Mendgen (1996). “Modelling with constraints: theoretical
                   foundation and application,” Computer-Aided Design 28(3):155–168.
               ANSI (1996). ANSI/BOMA Standard Method for Measuring Floor Area in
                   Office Buildings ANSI. Z65.1.
               Akinci, B., F. Boukamp, C. Gordon, D. Huber, C. Lyons, and K. Park (2006).
                   “A formalism for utilization of sensor systems and integrated project mod-
                   els for active construction quality control.” Automation in Construction
                   15(2): 124–138.
               American Institute of Architects (2006). “Business of Architecture: 2006 AIA
                   Firm Survey.” Washington, D.C., AIA.
               Arnold, J. A. (2007). “ Tectonic Vision and Products.” Tectonic Networks website.
                   http://www.tectonicbim.com/
               Ashcraft, H. W. J. (2006). “Building Information Modeling: A Great Idea in
                   Conflict with Traditional Concepts of Insurance, Liability, and Professional
                   Responsibility.” Schinnerer’s 45th Annual Meeting of Invited Attorneys.
               Autodesk (2004). “Return on Investment with Autodesk Revit.” 25 June 2007.
                   Autodesk Website. Autodesk, Inc. http://images.autodesk.com/adsk/files/
                   4301694_Revit_ROI_Calculator.zip
               Autodesk (2007). “DWF: The Best File Format for Published Design.” 25
                   June 2007. Autodesk DWF Community Website. 2007. Autodesk, Inc. Inc.
                   http://usa.autodesk.com/adsk/servlet/item?siteID=123112&id=8675679.


               BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
               Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                   469



bbiblio.indd 469                                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:51:45 AM
           470 Bibliography

                              Bader, F., D. Calvanese, D. McGuinness, D. Nardi, and P. Patel-Schneider
                                   (2003). The Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and
                                   Application, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
                              Baer, A., C. Eastman and M. Henrion (1979). “Geometrical modeling: A survey.”
                                   Computer-Aided Design 11(5): 253–272.
                              Ballard, G. (1999). “Improving Work Flow Reliability,” Proceedings IGLC-7,
                                   UC Berkeley, CA.
                              Ballard, G. (2000). The Last Planner™ System of Production Control, PhD
                                   Dissertation, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, U.K.
                              Barton Malow (2006). General Motors Corporation, Global V6 Engine Facility.
                                   Barton Malow website. 27 June 07. http://www.bartonmalow.com/
                                   specialties/corporate/gmengine.htm.
                              Beard, J., M. Loulakis and E. Wundram (2005). Design-Build: Planning
                                   Through Development, McGraw-Hill Professional.
                              Bijl, A., and G. Shawcross (1975). “Housing site layout system,” Computer-
                                   Aided Design 7(1): 2–10.
                              Birx, G. W. (2005). “BIM Evokes Revolutionary Changes to Architecture
                                   Practice at Ayers/Saint/Gross,” AIArchitect 12/2005. 29 June 2007. http://
                                   www.aia.org/aiarchitect/thisweek05/tw1209/tw1209changeisnow.cfm.
                              Bjork, B.C. (1995). Requirements and information structures for building
                                   product models. Helsinki, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland.
                              BLIS. (2002). “Building Lifecycle Interoperable Software.” BLIS project
                                   website. 25 June 07. http://www.blis-project.org/index2.html.
                              Booch, G. (1993). Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with Applications
                                   (2nd Edition), Addison-Wesley.
                              Boryslawski, M., (2006). “Building Owners Driving BIM: The Letterman
                                   Digital Arts Center Story.” AECBytes. Sept. 30 2006. 27 June 07. http://
                                   www.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/LDAC_story.html
                              Bozdoc, M., (2004). “The History of CAD.” MB Solutions website. 27 June 07.
                                   http://mbinfo.mbdesign.net/CAD-History.htm
                              Braid, I. C., (1973). Designing with Volumes. Cambridge UK, Cantab Press,
                                   Cambridge University.
                              Brucker, B. A., M. P. Case, E. W. East, B. K. Huston, S. D. Nachtigail, J. C.
                                   Shockley, S. C. Spangler and J. T. Wilson (2006). “Building Information
                                   Modeling (BIM): A Road map for Implementation to Support MILCON
                                   Transformation and Civil Works Proejcts within the U.S. Army Corps of
                                   Engineers,” US Army Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Devel-
                                   opment Center.
                              CAD (1976,1978,1980). Proceedings of CAD76, CAD78, CAD80, IPC Press,
                                   London.




bbiblio.indd 470                                                                                          1/16/08 11:51:45 AM
                                                                                                   Bibliography   471

               Caltech (1997) “Boeing 777: 100% digitally designed using 3D solids technol-
                   ogy.” 29 June 07. http://www.cds.caltech.edu/conferences/1997/vecs/
                   tutorial/Examples/Cases/777.htm
               Campbell, D. A., (2006). “Modeling Rules,” Architecture Week, http://www.
                   architectureweek.com/2006/1011/tools_1-1.html
               Chan, A., D. Scott, and E. Lam (2002). “Framework of Success Criteria
                   for Design/Build Projects,” Journal of Management in Engineering
                   18(3):120–128.
               CIFE and CURT (2007). “VDC/BIM Value survey result.” CIFE, Stanford
                   University. 10 March 07. CIFE/CURT. 25 June 07. http://cife.stanford.
                   edu/VDCSurvey.pdf
               CIS/2 (2007). “CIMSTEEL Integration Standards.” Steel Construction Insti-
                   tute. 05 June 07. http://www.cis2.org/
               Construction Clients Forum (1997). “60% of clients dissatisfied.” Building, 8.
               CORENET (2007). “Integrated Plan Checking Systems.” CORENET. 14 Nov
                   2006. 05 June 07. http://www.corenet.gov.sg/
               Court, P., C. Pasquire, A. Gibb and D. Bower (2006). “Design of a Lean and
                   Agile Construction System for a Large and Complex Mechanical and
                   Electrical Project,” Understanding and Managing the Construction Process:
                   Theory and Practice, Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the Interna-
                   tional Group for Lean Construction, R. Sacks and S. Bertelsen, eds., Catholic
                   University of Chile, School of Engineering, Santiago, Chile, 243–254.
               Crowley, A. (2003). “CIS/2 Interactive at NASCC,” New Steel Construction
                   11:10.
               CSIRO (2007). “Building & Construction.” CSIRO. 27 June 07. http://www.
                   csiro.au/science/ps2oz.html
               Dakan, M., (2006) “GSA’s BIM Pilot Program Shows Success.” Cadalyst. 19
                   July 2006. 27 June 07. http://aec.cadalyst.com/aec/article/articleDetail.
                   jsp?id=359335
               Day, M. (2002). “Intelligent Architectural Modeling.” AECMagazine Septem-
                   ber 2002. 27 June 07. http://www.caddigest.com/subjects/aec/select/
                   Intelligent_modeling_day.htm
               Debella, D. and R. Ries (2006). “Construction Delivery Systems: A Com-
                   parative Analysis of Their Performance within School Districts.” Journal
                   of Construction Engineering and Management 132(11): 1131–1138.
               Demkin, J. (2001). Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice. New York,
                   John Wiley and Sons.
               Department of Defense (2000). “Guidebook for Performance-Based Services
                   Acquisition (PBSA).” Defense Acquisition University Press, Washington,
                   D.C.




bbiblio.indd 471                                                                                                  1/16/08 11:51:46 AM
           472 Bibliography

                              Ding, L., R. Drogemuller, M. Rosenman, D. Marchant and J. Gero (2006).
                                  “Automating Code Checking for Building Designs – DesignCheck. Clients
                                  Driving Innovation: Moving Ideas into Practice”. K. Brown, K. Hampson
                                  and P. Brandon. Sydney, Australia, CRC for Construction Innovation for
                                  Icon.Net Pty Ltd.
                              Dolan, T. G., (2006). “First Cost vs. Life-Cycle Costs: Don’t get caught in the trap
                                  of saving now to pay later.” School Planning and Management. January 2006.
                              Douglas Steel (2007). “General Motors V-6 Engine Plant.” Douglas Steel
                                  Fabricating Corporation. 27 June 2007. http://douglassteel.com/gmv6.htm
                              Dunwell, S. (2007). “Linking Front and Back Offices: The ERP Vendor’s Per-
                                  spective.” Presentation at buildingSMART 2007: The New Business Model
                                  for Design, Construction and Facilities Management, RIBA, London, UK.
                              Eastman, C. M. (1975). “The use of computers instead of drawings in building
                                  design.” Journal of the American Institute of Architects March: 46–50.
                              Eastman, C. M. (1992). “Modeling of buildings: evolution and concepts.”
                                  Automation in Construction 1: 99–109.
                              Eastman, C. M. (1999). Building Product Models: computer environments
                                  supporting design and construction. Boca Raton, FL, USA, CRC Press.
                              Eastman, C. M., I. His and C. Potts (1998). Coordination in Multi-Organization
                                  Creative Design Projects. Design Computing Research Report. Atlanta,
                                  GA, College of Architecture, Georgia Institute of technology.
                              Eastman, C. M., R. Sacks and G. Lee (2001). Software Specification for a
                                  Precast Concrete Design and Engineering Software Platform. Atlanta, GA,
                                  USA, Georgia Institute of Technology.
                              Eastman, C. M., R. Sacks and G. Lee (2002). “Strategies for Realizing the
                                  Benefits of 3D Integrated Modeling of Buildings for the AEC Industry”
                                  ISARC - 19th International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in
                                  Construction, Washington DC, NIST.
                              Ergen, E., B. Akinci and R. Sacks (2007). “Tracking and Locating Compo-
                                  nents in a Precast Storage Yard Utilizing Radio Frequency Identification
                                  Technology and GPS.” Automation in Construction 16: 354–367.
                              Evey, L. (2006). Conversation between P. Teicholz and Lee Evey, President,
                                  Design-Build Institute of America.
                              FIATECH (2007). “aecXML.” FIATECH. 27 June 07. http://www.fiatech.org/
                                  projects/idim/aecxml.htm
                              FMI/CMAA (2005, 2006). “FMI/CMAA Annual Survey of Owners.” FMI/
                                  CMAA websites.
                              Folkestad, J. E. and D. Sandlin (2003). “Digital construction: Utilizing three
                                  dimensional (3D) computer models to improve constructability.” Colorado




bbiblio.indd 472                                                                                               1/16/08 11:51:46 AM
                                                                                                  Bibliography   473

                   State University. 27 June 07. www.cm.cahs.colostate.edu/Faculty_and_
                   Staff/folkestad/PDF/Folkestad%20&%20Sandlin%20IEMS% 202005.pdf
               Frampton, K. and J. Cava (1996). Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of
                   Construction in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture. Cambridge,
                   MA, The MIT Press.
               Gaddie, S. (2003). “Enterprise programme management: Connecting stra-
                   tegic planning to project delivery.” Journal of Facilities Management
                   2(2):177–191.
               Gallaher, M. P., A. C. O’Connor, J. John, L. Dettbarn and L. T. Gilday (2004).
                   Cost Analysis of Inadequate Interoperability in the U.S. Capital Facilities
                   Industry. Gaithersburg, Maryland., National Institute of Standards and
                   Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce Technology Administration.
               Geertsema, C., G. E. Gibson, Jr., D. Ryan-Rose (2003). Emerging Trends of
                   the Owner-Contractor Relationship for Capital Facility Projects from the
                   Contractor’s Perspective. Center for Construction Industry Studies Report.
                   University of Texas at Austin. Report No. 8. http://www.ce.utexas.edu/
                   org/ccis/a_ccis_report_32.pdf
               Gielingh, W. (1988). “General AEC Reference Model (GARM)” Conceptual
                   Modeling of Buildings, CIB W74⫹W78 Seminar, Lund, Sweden, CIB
                   Publication 126.
               Goldstein, H. (2001). “4D: Science Fiction or Virtual Reality” Engineering
                   News Record. April 16, 2001.
               Gonchar, J. (2007). “To architects, building information modeling is still
                   primarily a visualization tool.” Architectural Record. 07 27 2007. http://
                   archrecord.construction.com/features/digital/archives/0607dignews-2.asp
               Green Building Studio (2004). “AEC Design Practice Survey Identifies Oppor-
                   tunities to Accelerate 3D-CAD/BIM Adoption and Green Building Design.”
                   25 June 2007. http://www.greenbuildingstudio.com/gbsinc/pressrelease.
                   aspx?id=24
               Green Building Studio (2007). “Green Building XML Schema” from http://
                   www.gbxml.org/index.htm
               Grilo, A., and R. Jardim-Goncalves (2005). “Analysis on the development of
                   e-platforms in the AEC sector,” International Journal of Internet and Enter-
                   prise Management 3(2), 187–18.
               Grohoski, C. (2006). “ Virtual Reality Isn’t Just For Gamers Anymore.”
                   Webwire. 27 June 2006. 29 June 2007. http://www.webwire.com/
                   ViewPressRel.asp?aId=15849
               GSA (2006). 02 - GSA BIM Guide For Spatial Program Validation Version
                   0.90. Washington DC, United States General Services Administration: 61.




bbiblio.indd 473                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:51:47 AM
           474 Bibliography

                              GSA (2006a). “3D-4D Building Information Modeling.” GSA. 27 June 2007.
                                  http://www.gsa.gov/bim
                              GSA (2007). “GSA Performance-Based Acquisition.” GSA. 27 June 07. http://
                                  www.gsa.gov/Portal/gsa/ep/channelView.do?pageTypeId=8203&channel
                                  Page=%252Fep%252Fchannel%252FgsaOverview.jsp & channelId=
                                  13077
                              GT-COA (2007). “GSA Project - BIM Enabled Design Guide Automation.”
                                  GT Design Computing. 27 June 2007 http://dcom.arch.gatech.edu/gsa/
                              Hänninen, R. (2007). “Performance Metrics for Demand and Supply in the
                                  Building Lifecycle Process.” Presentation available online at: www.uni-
                                  weimar.de/icccbe/late/icccbe-x_050.pdf.
                              Haymaker, J., and M. Fischer (2001). “Challenges and Benefits of 4D Mode-
                                  ling on the Walt Disney Concert Hall Project.” Working Paper Nr. 64,
                                  CIFE, 17 pages.
                              Hendrickson, C. (2003). Project Management for Construction: Fundamental
                                  Concepts for Owners, Engineers, Architects and Builders Version 2.1. 27
                                  June 07 http://www.ce.cmu.edu/pmbook
                              Hodges, C., and W. W. Elvey (2005). “Making the Business Case For Sus-
                                  tainability: It’s Not Just About Getting Points.” Facilities Manager 21
                                  (4):50–53.
                              Hopp, W. J., and M. L. Spearman (1996). Factory Physics. Chicago, IRWIN.
                              Hospitals, V. (2007). “Dept. of Veterans Affairs.” from http://www.va.gov/
                                  facmgt/cost-estimating/.
                              Houbaux, P. (2005). The SABLE Project: Towards Unification of IFC based
                                  Product Model Servers, IAI-Iberia Industry Day, Madrid.
                              Howell, G. A., (1999). “What Is Lean Construction – 1999” Seventh Annual
                                  Conference of the International Group for Lean Construction, IGLC-7,
                                  Berkeley, CA.
                              IAI (2007). “BuildingSMART and Interoperability.” Industry Alliance for
                                  Interoperability. 18 June 07 http://www.iai-na.org/bsmart/index.php
                              IAI (2007a). “IFC/ifcXML Specifications.” http://www.iai-international.org/
                                  Model/IFC(ifcXML)Specs.html.
                              Ibbs, C. W., Y. H. Kwak, T. Ng, and A. M. Odabasi, (2003). “Project delivery
                                  systems and project change: Quantitative analysis.” Journal of Construction
                                  Engineering and Management 129(4): 382–387.
                              ICC (2007). “SMARTcodes™.” International Code Council. 30 June 07. http://
                                  www.iccsafe.org/SMARTcodes/
                              Jackson, E., (2000). Prototype Practice for the Building Industry: Operation
                                  and Maintenance Support Information. Linking the Construction Indus-
                                  try: Electronic Operation and Maintenance Manuals: Workshop Summary
                                  (2000), Federal Facilities Council.




bbiblio.indd 474                                                                                          1/16/08 11:51:47 AM
                                                                                                  Bibliography   475

               Jackson, S. (2002). “Project cost overruns and risk management.” Proceedings
                    of the 18th Annual ARCOM Conference, Glasgow.
               J.E. Dunn (2007). “Building Information Modeling Specialist” from http://
                    www.kcrevit.com/Job_Postings_Main.htm.
               Johnston, G. B. (2006). “Drafting culture : a social history of Architectural
                    graphic standards.” Ph.D. Thesis, Emory University, Atlanta.
               Kalay, Y. (1989). Modeling Objects and Environments. New York, NY, John
                    Wiley & Sons.
               Khemlani, L. (2004). “ The IFC Building Model: A Look Under the Hood.” 30
                    March 2004. AECbytes. 15 June 07. http://www.aecbytes.com/feature/2004/
                    IFCmodel.html
               Khemlani, L. (2005). “CORENET e-PlanCheck: Singapore’s Automated Code
                    Checking System.” 26 October 2005. AECbytes. 30 June 07. http://www.
                    aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2005/CORENETePlanCheck.html
               Khemlani, L. (2006). “AIA CBSP Symposium on BIM for Building Envelope
                    Design and Performance.” 15 Nov 2006. AECbytes. 28 June 07. http://
                    www.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/AIA-CBSP_BIM.html
               Khemlani, L. (2006). “Use of BIM by Facility Owners: An “Expositions”
                    Meeting.” 16 May 2006. AECbytes. 27 June 07. http://www.aecbytes.com/
                    buildingthefuture/2006/Expotitions_meeting.html
               Khemlani, L. (2005). “Multi-Disciplinary BIM at Work at GHAFARI
                    Associates.” 21 Nov 05. AECbytes. 27 June 07. http://www.aecbytes.com/
                    buildingthefuture/2006/BIM_Awards.html
               Khemlani, L. (2006). “2006 2nd Annual BIM Awards Part 1.” 12 July 2006.
                    AECbytes. 28 June 07. http://www.aecbytes.com/buildingthefuture/2006/
                    BIM_Awards.html
               Kieran, S., and J. Timberlake (2003). Refabricating Architecture: How Manu-
                    facturing Methodologies are Poised to Transform Building Construction.
                    New York, McGraw-Hill Professional.
               Koerckel, A., and G. Ballard (2005). “Return on Investment in Construction
                    Innovation – A Lean Construction Case Study.” Proceedings of the 14th Con-
                    ference of the International Group for Lean Construction, Sydney Australia.
               Konchar, M., and V. Sanvido (1998). “Comparison of U.S. Project Delivery
                    Systems.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 124(6):
                    435–444.
               Koo, B., and M. Fischer (2000). “Feasibility Study of 4D CAD in Commercial
                    Construction.” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 126
                    (5): 251–260.
               Koskela, L. (1992). Application of the New Production Philosophy to
                    Construction, Center for Integrated Facility Engineering, Department of
                    Civil Engineering, Stanford University.




bbiblio.indd 475                                                                                                 1/16/08 11:51:47 AM
           476 Bibliography

                              Kunz, J., and M. Fischer (2007). Virtual Design and Construction: Themes,
                                  Case Studies and Implementation Suggestions, Center for Integrated Facil-
                                  ity Engineering, Stanford University.
                              Laurenzo, R. (2005). “Leaning on lean solutions,” Aerospace America, June
                                  2005: 32–36.
                              Lipman, R. R. (2004). “Mobile 3D visualization for steel structures.” Automation
                                  in Construction 13(1): 119–125.
                              Liston, K., J. Kunz and M. Fischer (2000). “Requirements and benefits of
                                  interactive information workspaces in construction,” Proceedings of the
                                  Eight International Conference on: Computing in Civil and Building
                                  Engineering (ICCCBE-VIII), Renate Fruchter, Feniosky Pena-Mora, and
                                  W.M. Kim Roddis (eds), Stanford, CA, 2:1277–1284.
                              Liston, K., M. Fischer and T. Winograd (2001). “Focused Sharing of Informa-
                                  tion for Multidisciplinary Decision Making by Project Teams.” ITCon
                                  (Electronic Journal of Information Technology in Construction) 6: 69–81.
                              Ma, Z., Q. Shen and J. Zhang (2005). “Application of 4D for dynamic site
                                  layout and management of construction projects.” Automation in Con-
                                  struction 14(3): 369–381.
                              Majumdar, T., M. Fischer and B. R. Schwegler (2006). “Conceptual Design
                                  Review with a Virtual Reality Mock-Up Model,” Joint International Con-
                                  ference on Computing and Decision Making in Civil and Building
                                  Engineering. Montréal, Canada.
                              McDuffie, T. (2007). “BIM: Transforming a Traditional Practice Model into a
                                  Technology-Enabled Integrated Practice Model.” AIA Cornerstone. http://
                                  www.aia.org/nwsltr_pa.cfm?pagename=pa_a_200610_bim
                              McKinney, K., J. Kim, M. Fischer and C. Howard (1996). “Interactive
                                  4D-CAD.” Proceedings of the Third Congress on Computing in Civil
                                  Engineering, Jorge Vanegas and Paul Chinowsky (Eds.), ASCE, Anaheim,
                                  CA, 383–389.
                              McKinney, K., and M. Fischer (1998). “Generating, evaluating and visualizing
                                  construction schedules with 4D-CAD tools.” Automation in Construction
                                  7(6): 433–447.
                              McNair, S., and M. Flynn (2006). “Managing an ageing workforce in construc-
                                  tion.” Leicester, Department for Work and Pensions Centre for Research
                                  into the Older Workforce.
                              Mitchell, J., and H. Schevers (2005) “Building Information Modelling for FM
                                  at Sydney Opera House.” CRC Construction Innovation, CRC-CI Project
                                  2005-001-C Report No: 2005-001-C-4.
                              Moore, G. A. (1991). Crossing the Chasm, New York, NY, Harper Business.
                              Morgan, M. H. (1960). Vitruvius - The Ten Books of Architecture, New York,
                                  Dover Press. See esp. Book 1, Chapter 2, Section 2.




bbiblio.indd 476                                                                                           1/16/08 11:51:48 AM
                                                                                                    Bibliography   477

               Munroe, C. (2007) “Construction Cost Estimating.” American Society of
                   Professional Estimators. 27 June 2007. http://www.aspenational.com/CO
                   NSTRUCTION%20Cost%20ESTIMATING.pdf
               NASA (1978–1980). Conference on Engineering and Scientific Data Manage-
                   ment, Hampton, VA, NASA.
               National Research Council (1998). Stewardship of Federal Facilities: A Proac-
                   tive Strategy for Managing the Nation’s Public Assets. National Academy
                   Press, Washington, D.C.
               Neuberg, F. (2007). “MAX BGL - Progress is Built on Ideas.” buildingSMART:
                   The New Business Model for Design, Construction and Facilities Manage-
                   ment, RIBA, London, UK.
               NIBS (2007). “National BIM Standard.” National Institute of Building Science.
                   27 June 07. http://www.facilityinformationcouncil.org/bim/index.php
               NIST and Fiatech (2006). “Capital Facilities Information Handover Guide,
                   Part 1.” NISTIR 7259. Department of Commerce. 27 June 07. http://www.
                   fire.nist.gov/bfrlpubs/build06/PDF/b06016.pdf
               Oberlender, G. and S Trost (2001). “Predicting Accuracy Of Early Cost Esti-
                   mates Based On Estimate Quality.” Journal of Construction Engineering
                   and Management 127(3): 173–182.
               O’Connor, J. T., and S. C. Dodd (1999). “Capital Facility Delivery with
                   Enterprise Resource Planning Systems.” Center for Construction Industry
                   Studies Report. University of Texas at Austin. Report No. 16.
               OmniClass (2007). “OmniClass: A Strategy for Classifying the Built Environ-
                   ment,” OmniClass. 30 June 07. http://www.omniclass.org/
               Onuma, K. G. and D. Davis (2006). “Integrated Facility Planning using BIM
                   Web Portals.” 9 Oct 2006.from Federal Facilities Council. 30 June 07.
                   http://www.onuma.com/services/FederalFacilitiesCouncil.php
               Pasquire, C., R. Soar and A. Gibb (2006). “Beyond Pre-Fabrication - The
                   Potential of Next Generation Technologies to Make a Step Change in
                   Construction Manufacturing” Understanding and Managing the Construc-
                   tion Process: Theory and Practice, Proceedings of the 14th Conference of the
                   International Group for Lean Construction R. Sacks and S. Bertelsen, eds.,
                   Catholic University of Chile, School of Engineering, Santiago, Chile, 243–254.
               Pixley, D., J. Holm, K. Howard and G. Zettel (2006). “A Look at Sutter’s Lean
                   Program.” LCI Congress, Lean Construction Institute.
               PCI (2004). Design Handbook of Precast and Prestressed Concrete. Skokie,
                   IL, Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute.
               Post, N. M. (2002). “Movie of Job that Defies Description Is Worth More
                   Than A Million Words.” Engineering News Record 8 April 2002.
               Ramsey, G. and H. Sleeper (2000). Architectural Graphic Standards. New
                   York, John Wiley & Sons.




bbiblio.indd 477                                                                                                   1/16/08 11:51:48 AM
           478 Bibliography

                              Requicha, A. (1980). “Representations of rigid solids: theory, methods and
                                  systems.” ACM Comput. Surv 12(4): 437–466.
                              Robbins, E. (1994). Why Architects Draw. Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
                              Roe, A. (2002). “Building Digitally Provides Schedule, Cost Efficiencies: 4D
                                  CAD is expensive but becomes more widely available.” Engineering News
                                  Record 25 February 2002.
                              Roe, A. (2006). “The Fourth Dimension is Time” Steel, Australia, 15.
                              Romm, J. R. (1994). Lean and Clean Management: How to Boost Profits and
                                  Productivity by Reducing Pollution, Kodansha International.
                              Roodman, D. M., and N. Lenssen (1995). A Building Revolution: How Ecology
                                  and Health Concerns Are Transforming Construction, Worldwatch
                                  Institute.
                              Rundell, R. (2006). “1-2-3 Revit: BIM and Cost Estimating, Part 1: How BIM
                                  can support cost estimating.” Cadalyst 7 August 2006.
                              Sacks, R. (2004). “ Evaluation of the economic impact of computer-integration
                                  in precast concrete construction.” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineer-
                                  ing 18(4): 301–312.
                              Sacks, R., and R. Barak (2007). “Impact of three-dimensional parametric
                                  modeling of buildings on productivity in structural engineering practice.”
                                  Automation in Construction (2007), doi:10.1016/j.autcon.2007.08.003
                              Sacks, R., C. M. Eastman and G. Lee (2003). “Process Improvements in
                                  Precast Concrete Construction Using Top-Down Parametric 3-D Computer-
                                  Modeling.” Journal of the Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute 48(3):
                                  46–55.
                              Sanvido, V., and M. Konchar (1999). Selecting Project Delivery Systems,
                                  Comparing Design-Build, Design-Bid-Build, and Construction Manage-
                                  ment at Risk, Project Delivery Institute, State College, PA.
                              Sawyer, T. (2006). “Early Adopters Find the Best Models Are Digital Virtuosos.”
                                  Engineering News Record 02 October 2006.
                              Sawyer, T., and T. Grogan (2002). “Finding the Bottom Line Gets A Gradual
                                  Lift From Technology.” Engineering News Record 12 August 2002.
                              Schenck, D. A., and P. R. Wilson (1994). Information Modeling the EXPRESS
                                  Way. New York, Oxford University Press.
                              Schodek, D., M. Bechthold, K. Griggs, K. M. Kao and M. Steinberg (2005).
                                  Digital Design and Manufacturing, CAD/CAM Applicatons in Architec-
                                  ture and Design. New York, John Wiley and Sons.
                              Schwegler, B., M. Fischer and K. Liston (2000). “New Information Technol-
                                  ogy Tools Enable Productivity Improvements.” North American Steel
                                  Construction Conference, Las Vegas, AISC.




bbiblio.indd 478                                                                                          1/16/08 11:51:49 AM
                                                                                                 Bibliography   479

               Sheppard, L. M. (2004). “Virtual Building for Construction Projects” IEEE
                    Computer Graphics and Applications January 6–12.
               Smoot, B. (2007). Building Acquisition and Ownership Costs. CIB Workshop,
                    CIB.
               Stephens, S. (2007). “Crowding the Marquee.” Architectural Record January
                    2007. 30 June 07. http://archrecord.construction.com/practice/firmCulture/
                    0701crowding-1.asp
               Still, K. (2000). Crowd Dynamics. PhD Thesis. University of Warwick, Depart-
                    ment of Mathematics.
               Sullivan, C. C. (2007). “Integrated BIM and Design Review for Safer, Better
                    Buildings: How project teams using collaborative design reduce risk,
                    creating better health and safety in projects.” McGraw-Hill Construction
                    Continuing Education. 27 June 07. http://construction.com/CE/articles/
                    0706navis-1.asp
               Teicholz, E. (2004). “Bridging the AEC/FM Technology Gap.” IFMA Facility
                    Management Journal Apr/Mar 2004.
               Thomas, H. R., C. Korte, V. E. Sanvido and M. K. Parfitt (1999). “Conceptual
                    Model for Measuring Productivity of Design and Engineering.” Journal of
                    Architectural Engineering 5(1): 1–7.
               Thomson, D., and R. Miner (2006). “Building Information Modeling - BIM:
                    Contractual Risks are Changing with Technology.” The Construction Law
                    Briefing Paper. 27 June 07. http://www.aepronet.org/ge/no35.html
               TNO (2007). “Knowledge for Business.” from http://www.ifcbrowser.com/.
               Tournan, A. (2003). “Calculation of Contingency in Construction Projects.”
                    IEEE Transacations on Engineering Management 50(2): 135–140.
               Tulacz, G. J. (2006). “The Top Owners.” Engineering News Record 27 Nov 2006.
               U.S. (2004, 26-May-2005). “2002 Economic Census Industry Series Reports
                    Construction.” 2002 Economic Census from. http://www.census.gov/
                    econ/census02/guide/INDRPT23.HTM.
               U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) (1997). “Cost Estimating Guide.” DOE
                    G 430.1-1, Washington, D.C.: Chapter 11.vUnited States. Department of
                    Energy (1997). “Cost Estimating Guide.” DOE G 430.1-1, Washington,
                    D.C.: Chapter 11.
               U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and I. P. Public Technology (1996). “The
                    Sustainable Building Technical Manual: Green Building Design, Construc-
                    tion, and Operations.” Washington, D.C., U.S. Department of Energy: 34.
               USDOT - Federal Highway Administration (2006). “Design-Build Effective-
                    ness Study.” USDOT Final Report. 27 June 07. http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/
                    reports/designbuild/designbuild.htm




bbiblio.indd 479                                                                                                1/16/08 11:51:49 AM
           480 Bibliography

                              Warne, T., and J. Beard (2005). Project Delivery Systems: Owner’s Manual,
                                  American Council of Engineering Companies, Washington, D.C.
                              Weaire, D., and R. Phelan (1994). “A counterexample to Kelvin’s conjecture
                                  on minimal surfaces.” Phil. Mag. Lett. 69:107–110.
                              Womack, J. P., and D. T. Jones (2003). Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Cre-
                                  ate Wealth in Your Corporation. New York, Simon & Schuster.
                              Yaski, Y. (1981). A consistent database for an integrated CAAD system. PhD
                                  Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh PA.


                              ORGANIZATION WEB SITES

                              AISC (2007). American Institute of Steel Construction, http://www.aisc.org/.
                              CIFE (2007). Center for Integrated Facility Engineering, http://www.stanford.
                                 edu/group/CIFE/.
                              CURT (2007). The Construction User’s Roundtable, http://www.curt.org/.
                              DBIA (2007). Design Build Institute of America, http://www.dbia.org/index.
                                 html.
                              Eurostep (2007). Information Solutions for a Global Age, http://www.eurostep.
                                 com/.
                              IAI (2007). International Alliance for Interoperability http://www.
                                 iai-international.org/index.html.
                              LCI (2004). Lean Construction Institute http://www.leanconstruction.org/.
                              NIBS (2007). National Institute of Building Sciences, http://www.nibs.org.
                              OGC (2007). Geography Markup Language http://www.opengeospatial.org/
                                 standards/gml




bbiblio.indd 480                                                                                        1/16/08 11:51:50 AM
                                                                                                                              Bibliography    481

               COMPANY AND SOFTWARE INDEX

                   Company                 Products                           Website                         Page Reference

                   1stPricing              1stPricing Plug-Ins for            www.1stpricing.com              235
                                           AutoCAD® and TurboCAD

                   AceCAD                  StruCAD®                           www.acecad.co.uk                40, 269t, 270

                   ActiveFacility          ActiveFacility                     www.activefacility.com          127

                   AEC Design Group        CADPIPE Electrical                 www.cadpipe.com                 43, 61, 269t, 276
                                           CADPIPE Hanger
                                           CADPIPE HVAC
                                           CADPIPE Industrial
                                           Commercial Pipe

                   ANSYS                   Fluent                             www.fluent.com/                 163t, 170t

                   aSa                     aSa Rebar Software                 www.asarebar.com                269t, 272

                             ®
                   Autodesk                Architectural Desktop              www.autodesk.com                29, 34t, 37, 43, 52, 54, 57–8,
                                           Design Review                                                      60–61, 81, 120, 161, 163t, 164t,
                                           Revit® Architecture                                                169, 170t, 184, 184t, 186, 194t,
                                           Revit® Structure                                                   196, 218, 228, 229t, 235, 269t, 272,
                                           Revit® Systems                                                     276, 323t, 361t, 372, 379, 380t,
                                           3ds Max                                                            387, 452, 455, 458, 459, 461

                   AutoDesSys, Inc.        form·Z                             www.formz.com                   53, 64, 77, 158–9, 159f, 164, 164t,
                                                                                                              204, 206, 323, 323t, 395–6, 408f

                   Beck Technology, Inc.   DProfiler with RS Means            www.dpearth.com/                62, 100, 158, 165, 219, 324t,
                                                                                                              442–447

                   Bentley Systems         Architecture Building Electrical   www.bentley.com                 29, 34t, 37–8, 52, 54, 58–9, 61, 77,
                                           Systems                                                            81, 127, 163t, 169, 170t, 184t, 193,
                                           Building Mechanical Systems                                        229t, 231t, 269t, 276, 323t, 324t,
                                           Facilities Planner                                                 328t, 333, 333t, 357, 380, 381t,
                                           Generative Components                                              382, 387, 395, 397–8, 404, 434
                                           Microstation
                                           PlantSpace Design Series
                                           Structural
                                           Triforma
                                           STAAD Pro                          http://www.reiworld.com/

                   BIMWorld                                                   www.bimworld.com                193, 195t, 196

                   Carrier                 Carrier E20-II                     http://www.commercial.carrier   170t, 184t
                                                                              .com/commercial/hvac/general/
                                                                              0,,CLI1_DIV12_ETI495,00.html
                                                                                                                                      (continued)




bbiblio.indd 481                                                                                                                              1/16/08 11:51:50 AM
           482 Bibliography

             Company              Products                 Website                             Page Reference
                                             ®
             COADE Engineering    CADWorx                  www.coade.com/                      61
             Software             CEASAR II®

             Common Point, Inc.   Common Point 4D          www.commonpointinc.com              129, 231–2
                                  ConstructSim
                                  OpSim

             Computers and        SAP, ETABS,              http://www.csiberkeley.com/         61, 372, 438
             Structures Inc.

             CSC                  3d⫹                      3dplus.cscworld.com/                269t, 270t

             Dassault Systemes    CATIA                    www.3ds.com/home/                   54, 60, 323t, 413–4, 416

             Data Design System   DDS IFC Viewer           www.dds-bsp.co.uk/IFCViewer         79
             UK Limited                                    .html

             U.S. Department of   Energy Plus              http://www.eere.energy.gov/build-   170t, 324t, 394, 394f, 395
             Energy                                        ings/energyplus/

             Design Data          SDS/2                    www.dsndata.com                     29, 40, 269t, 270, 323t, 328t, 333t

             Digital Building     BIMContent Manager       www.digitalbuildingsolutions.com    195t
             Solutions

             eRENA                ViCROWD                  www.erena.kth.se                    129t

             Enterprixe           Model Server             www.enterprixe.com                  127

             EPM Technology       EDMserver                www.epmtech.jotne.com               127

             Esteco               modeFRONTIER             www.esteco.com                      180

             Eurostep             ModelServer for IFC      www.eurostep.com                    88, 127

             Exactal Pty Ltd.     CostX™                   www.exactal.com                     120–1, 122f
                                  CostX Viewer™

             Flomerics            Flovent                  http://www.flomerics.com/flovent/   170t

             Flow Science         Micro Flow               www.flow3d.com                      170t

             FormFonts            Form Fonts 3D            www.formfonts.com                   193, 195t

             Gehry Technologies   Digital Project          www.gehrytechnologies.com           34t, 52–4, 60, 77, 127, 163, 177,
                                                                                               179t, 229t,269t, 273, 407–13, 410f,
                                                                                               415–8, 420, 422–4, 427,430, 467–8

             Google               3D warehouse             www.sketchup.com                    193
                                  SketchUp                                                     53, 58–9, 158, 160, 164t, 193, 194t,
                                                                                               195t, 219

             Graphisoft ||        ArchiCAD®                www.graphisoft.com                  29, 59, 127, 218, 220, 229, 269t,
                                  ArchiGlazing, Ductwork                                       273, 276, 455
                                  ArchiFM

             GT STRUDL            GTSTRUDL                 www.gtstrudl.gatech.edu/            170t




bbiblio.indd 482                                                                                                                     1/16/08 11:51:50 AM
                                                                                                                   Bibliography     483

                   Company                Products                    Website                        Page Reference

                   IES                    Simulex                     www.iesve.com                  129t, 158, 162, 163t, 164t, 170t
                                          Apache

                   IMSI/Design            TurboCAD                    www.turbocad.com               235

                   Innovaya               Visual Simulation 3.0       www.innovaya.com               220–1, 231t, 292
                                          Visual Estimating 9.4

                   Intellicad             IntelliCAD MEP              www.intellicad.org             323t, 328t, 333t

                   Interspec              e-SPECS                     www.e-specs.com                186

                   Leap Software          AXSYS PRESTO                www.leapsoft.com               434

                   Legion                 Legion Studio               www.legion.com                 1095, 129t

                   Lawrence Berkeley      DOE-2                       http://www.doe2.com/           170t, 324t, 394, 394f, 395
                   National Laboratory    Energy Plus
                                          Radiance

                   LKSoft                 IDS_STEP Database           www.ida-step.net               88

                   MAP                    CAD-Duct                    www.cadduct.com                269t, 276,

                   Natural Works          Displacement Ventilation    ep.natural-works.com           392t, 393f, 394, 401–403f

                   NavisWorks, Ltd*       JetStream Clash Detective   www.navisworks.com             125, 135, 144, 218, 231, 254, 276,
                                          JetStream Freedom                                          324, 328, 332–4, 365, 455, 459–60
                                          JetStream Roamer

                   Nemetschek             Allplan Engineering         www.nemetschek.com             xii, 259, 269t, 272–3
                                          Allplan Building Services

                   Objects Online, Inc.                               www.objectsonline.com          194t

                   Octaga                 Modeler                     www.octaga.com                 79

                   ODEON Room             ODEON                       http://www.odeon.dk/           170
                   Acoustics Software

                   OnCenter               On Screen Takeoff®          www.oncenter.com               221

                   Onuma and Associ-      Onuma Planning System™      www.onuma.com                  127, 323, 344, 356
                   ates, Inc.

                   Primavera Systems      P6                          www.primavera.com              58, 138, 224, 229–32, 427

                   Quickpen               PipeDesigner 3D             www.quickpen.com               184, 269, 276
                                          DuctDedesigner

                   RAM International      Structural System           http://www.ramint.com/         58, 170, 324, 328, 333
                                          Advanse
                                          Connection
                                          Concept

                   Renkus-Heinx Inc.      EASE                        http://www.renkus-heinz.com/   173t
                                                                      ease/ease_intro/intro_about_
                                                                      ease.html

                   Revit City             Downloads                   www.revitcity.com              194t

                                                                                                                              (continued)




bbiblio.indd 483                                                                                                                        1/16/08 11:51:50 AM
           484 Bibliography

                Company                Products                     Website                           Page Reference
                              ®
                Rhinoceros             McNeel North America         www.rhino3d.com/                  37, 53, 77, 159, 164t, 323t, 379,
                                                                                                      380f, 385,413–414

                RISA Technologies      RISA 3D                      www.risatech.com/                 58, 170t
                                       RISA Foundation
                                       RISA Floor
                                       RISA Tower

                Robobat                ROBOT Millenium              www.robobat.com                   58, 170t, 324t, 413, 415f

                Sage                   Timberline Office            www.sagetimberlineoffice.com      220

                SCADA Soft AG          WizCAD™                      www.scada.ch                      61


                SoftTech               SoftTech V6 Manufacturer     www.softtechnz.com                269t, 273

                Solar Energy Labora-   TRNSYS                       http://sel.me.wisc.edu/trnsys     170
                tory, U. Wisconsin

                Solibri                Model Checker™               www.solibri.com                   xiv, 79, 89, 122, 123f, 170t, 171,
                                                                                                      218, 291, 296

                SolidWorks Inc.        SolidWorks                   www.solidworks.com/               54, 273, 323t, 413

                SprinkCAD              SprinkCAD                    www.sprinkcad.com                 269t, 276, 323t, 361t

                Square One research    Ecotect                      www.ecotect.com                   59, 158, 162–3, 162f, 163t, 164t,
                Pty Ltd                ESP-r                        http://www.esru.strath.ac.uk/     166, 170t, 302

                Strand7                STRAND                       www.strand7.com                   324t, 380, 381f, 413

                StructureWorks         StructureWorks               www.structureworks.org            29, 54, 269t, 271

                Synchro, Ltd.          Synchro 4D                   www.synchroltd.com                231t

                Tectonic Network       BIM Library manager          www.tectonicnetwork.com           190, 196, 196f, 311

                Tekla                  Structures                   www.tekla.com                     29, 40, 40f, 52, 61–62, 81, 1707t,
                                                                                                      181f, 184t, 204, 265f, 269t, 270,
                                                                                                      271, 272, 273, 303, 323t, 383,
                                                                                                      396–397, 397f, 432, 434f, 435, 438

                Trelligence            Affinity™                    www.trelligence.com               158, 161, 164t, 171, 302

                U.S. Cost              Success Estimator            www.uscost.com                    120, 121, 220, 460, 461

                Vico†                  Constructor                  www.vicosoftware.com              59, 220, 224, 229t, 231t, 298
                                       Estimator

                Vizelia                FACILITY                     www.vizelia.com                   127, 129f

                WolfRam research       Mathematica®                 http://www.wolfram.com/           178, 180
                Inc.

           ||
              In March, 2007 Nemetschek, Inc. acquired Graphisoft. Throughout the book, however, all Graphisoft products are referred to as
              Graphisoft products.
           *
             In June, 2007 Autodesk, Inc. announced its plans to acquire Navisworks. In the book, all Navisworks products are referred to as
             Navisworks products.
           †
             In March, 2007 Vico, Inc. was spun out from the Construction Solutions Division of Graphisoft.




bbiblio.indd 484                                                                                                                           1/16/08 11:51:51 AM
                                                                  Index



                  (See Software Index for software)                                        B
                                                                                           BAMTEC system, 259
              A                                                                            BAS. See Building Automated System
              ACIS, 68                                                                     Beck Group, 215, 440–9
              acoustic analysis, 162f, 163t, 170t, 453–4, 468                              Beijing Aquatics Center, 154, 177, 180, 258, 294, 321–4t,
              Adobe 3D PDF. See PDF                                                             375–88
              adopting BIM, 12, 94, 136, 142, 145, 166–7, 185,                             BEM. See Building Element Model
                    197–203, 240–4, 267, 286–8, 292–3, 308–9, 420,                         Bentley. See Bentley in Software Index
                    437, 439, 456, 464                                                       Generative Components (GC), 37–38, 58, 395
                 guidelines, 22, 82, 132–5, 222–3, 276–80                                    MDL Programming Language, 43, 67, 171, 381f
                 goals for fabricators, 277–8                                              BLS. See Bureau of Labor Statistics
                 issues, 21–3, 200–1, 278–82, 298–301                                      Boeing, 32–3, 66, 94
              ADT. See Autodesk Architectural Desktop in                                   Boolean operations, 26, 27, 39, 59, 276
                    Software Index                                                         boundary representation (B-rep), 26, 28f
              AGC. See Associated General Contractors                                      Building Automated System (BAS), 393–4, 399, 401, 404
              air flow. See Computational Fluid Dynamics                                   building code checking, 89, 151, 171, 192, 291, 305
              American Institute of Architects (AIA), 22, 133, 136, 143,                   building model repository, 58, 66, 88, 127f, 297,
                    204, 455                                                                    344–345, 467
              American Institute of Steel Construction (AISC), 41, 72, 237                   discussion of, 87–90
              animation software, 59, 69t, 106, 224, 228, 230f, 231t                         software vendors, 58, 88
              ANSI/BOMA, 35, 83, 171, 172f                                                 building product model, 68, 79f, 89–90, 237
              Application Programming Interface (API), 56, 60, 81, 166,                      history, xi–xii, 66–67, 70–1, 287
                    229t, 333, 407                                                           standards, 70–2
              ArchiCAD. See Graphisoft in Software Index                                   Building Element Model (BEM), 191–3, 194t, 196, 467
              architect                                                                    buildingSMART, 80
                 adoption of BIM, 26, 33, 36–9, 41, 51–2, 145, 150–67,                       in Europe, 80, 84
                    173–80, 187–90, 202–5, 213, 233, 240–1, 285, 292–4,                    Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 10f
                    311–2, 315–6, 387, 395, 417, 442, 450–65
                 justifying BIM, 137, 197–200                                              C
                 phasing in of BIM, 201                                                    CAD, 10, 25, 32, 35, 66, 141, 151, 243, 248, 276, 300,
              Arup Consulting Engineers. See Ove Arup and Partners                              363, 387
              artificial intelligence, 309                                                   history of, 27–9, 287
              aSa. See aSa Rebar Software in Software Index                                  compared to BIM, 12–4, 16–8, 22–3, 29, 94, 216, 228,
              Association of General Contractors (AGC), 22, 86, 133,                            239, 251–4, 256–9, 276, 437, 456
                    136, 143, 221, 239, 290                                                  object-based systems, 43
              AutoCAD. See Autodesk in Software Index                                      Camino Group Medical Building, 98t, 101–4, 113,
                 ARX, 43, 61                                                                    133–138,141–46, 182, 217, 227, 254, 259, 261, 287,
                 AutoLISP, 56, 61                                                               290, 298, 312, 358–74
                 XREF, 61                                                                  cast-in-place reinforced concrete, 40, 43, 45, 61, 84, 161,
              automated manufacturing technologies, 9, 19, 40, 205,                             220, 233, 238, 256, 257t, 265, 269t, 271–2, 399–400,
                    237, 257, 298, 306–7                                                        438, 442

              BIM Handbook: A Guide to Building InformationModeling for Owners, Managers,Designers, Engineers, and Contractors.
              Chuck Eastman, Paul Teicholz, Rafael Sacks and Kathleen Liston Copyright © 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
                                                                                                                                               485



bindex.indd 485                                                                                                                                 12/17/07 8:17:28 PM
          486 Index
          CAVE (Computer Aided Virtual Environment), 379,               D
                452–4, 464                                              data exchange, 52, 56, 67, 70, 79f, 90f, 166, 174, 175f,
          Center for Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE), 8t, 146,        176f, 201, 266, 290, 332, 333t, 387, 398, 439
                304f, 452                                                 direct link, 169, 381f
          CFD. See computational fluid dynamics                           formats, 69t, 169, 170t, 171
          China State Construction and Engineering Corporation,           use cases, 80
                375, 377t, 411                                          data model, 65, 67–2, 75, 78, 82, 84, 86, 467
          CIFE. See Center for Integrated Facility Engineering          DB. See Design Build
          circulation design validation, 171, 296t, 306, 450,           DBB. See Design Bid Build
                462–3                                                   DBIA. See Design Build Institute of America
          CIS/2, 60–1, 65, 68, 69t, 71, 72, 88, 90f, 171, 237, 263,     Denver Art Museum Extension, 204, 205, 298
                267 328t, 333t, 398                                     Department of Commerce, 9, 247t
          clash detection, 126t, 144, 182, 208, 214, 264, 298, 303,     design coordination errors, 18, 19, 48, 63, 98, 188, 197,
                364, 368t, 370, 373, 418, 422–3, 429f, 430, 438              198, 211, 216, 237, 243, 254–5, 314, 323t, 331, 363,
             soft clash, 216, 253, 274                                       422–3, 430, 437
             hard clash, 216, 253                                       design rules, 36, 52, 279, 291
          CNC. See Computer Numerical Control                           Design-Bid-Build (DBB), 3–6, 116f, 117, 118, 326, 338, 450
          Coast Guard Facility Planning, 21, 98t, 101, 106, 109–10,     Design-Build (DB), 3–6, 116f, 211, 325–328, 443
                113, 127, 132t, 133–134, 146, 339–57                    Design-Build Institute of America (DBIA), 6–7
          COM (Common Object Model), 67, 169                            design-for-fabrication, 157, 178–179, 181
          computational fluid dynamics (CFD), 33, 169, 170t, 306,       DESTINI, 62
                394, 398, 401f, 404                                     displacement ventilation (DV). See ventilation
          Computer Numerical Control (CNC), 19, 178, 306                Digital Project (DP). See Gehry Technologies in
          concept design, 62, 82, 158–167, 164t, 197–8, 353,                 Software Index
                406, 462                                                DPR, Inc., 227, 254, 358–374
          contracting firm, 209–18, 221, 227f, 236–9, 241, 246, 267,    DProfiler. See Beck Technologies in Software Index
                274, 282, 328, 359, 361t, 364, 369–72, 377, 427         drawing production, 50–1, 148, 185, 197, 257t, 281, 315,
             firm size, 209f                                                 379, 457f
             labor productivity, 8f, 8–10, 104, 199, 374                  bi-directional editing, 50–1, 58
          Construction Specification Institute (CSI), 120, 192, 194t,     templates, 50, 203, 277
                444f, 461                                               DWF (Drawing Web Format), 58, 61, 66, 69t, 86–7, 90–1,
          Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG), 26–7, 28f, 32, 36,              125, 174, 303
                43, 59                                                  DXF (Drawing Exchange Format), 58–61, 65, 68–70, 72,
          CORENET, 81–2, 89, 103, 171                                        90–1, 165, 380
          cost
             construction, 9, 48, 96, 99f, 114, 165, 197, 208, 215,     E
                240–1, 367t, 370f, 407, 419t                            e-Specs. See Interspec in Software Index
             control, 211, 212, 235, 295–7, 369, 370f, 427, 430         Ecotect. See Square One Research in Software Index
             database, 18, 222f, 443f, 443–5, 449                       EDM ModelChecker. See EPM Technology in Software Index
             estimating, 18, 163–5, 173, 191–2, 204, 207, 212,          energy analysis, 13, 18, 46, 85, 91, 103, 113t, 117, 120,
                218–24, 222f, 251, 293, 309, 314, 321–4t, 440–9,             137, 145, 163t, 169, 170t, 306
                443f, 450, 460–1                                        EnergyPlus. See Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in
             of labor, 199, 460                                              Software Index
             of modeling, 239–41, 366, 367t                             engineer
             of BIM adoption, 199–200, 227                                justifying BIM, 197–201
             savings, 141–2, 150, 337–8, 356, 361t, 363                   phasing in of BIM, 201–3
          courthouse, 296, 455, 462                                     engineered-to-order (ETO) components, 243, 246–9,
          Critical Path Method (CPM), 224, 326                               256–7, 260–6, 272–4, 283
          Crown house Ltd., 259f                                        Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), 266, 282, 285,
          CSG. See Constructive Solid Geometry                               289–90, 314–5
          Current Versioning System (CVS), 423                          Eurostep Model Server. See Eurostep in Software Index
          curtain walls, 43, 54, 155, 183, 197, 201, 243, 247t, 269t,   estimating
                272–3, 292, 300, 405–17, 431                              conceptual, 112t, 114, 142, 219, 440–3, 448
          custom component libraries, 62, 190–6, 279, 309                 different methods, 21, 99–100, 114, 120–1, 218–23,
          CV. See ventilation                                                441–2
          CVS. See Current Versioning System                            EXPRESS, 65, 70–5, 91




bindex.indd 486                                                                                                                12/17/07 8:17:29 PM
                                                                                                                         Index    487
              F                                                             H
              fabrication, fabricator, 61–7, 71–2, 78, 83, 98t, 100, 104,   H3 (Hardy Collaboration Architecture LLC), 450–65
                    151, 157, 167, 178, 180–3, 188, 190f, 198, 204–6,       hard clash. See clash detection
                    212, 236–7, 243–282, 292, 298–302, 307, 320, 329,       High Concrete Structures Inc., 438
                    336–7, 362, 382–7, 404, 410–2, 436–7, 467–8             Hillwood Commercial Project, 440–59
              façade, 37–38, 199, 246–8, 252–3, 273, 319, 378, 387,         HOK Sports, 37, 37f, 38
                    390–6, 405–18, 436f, 451f                               Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 419, 427,
              facility management, 59, 73, 80, 82, 89, 94, 95f, 109,            428f, 429f
                    127–8, 131, 131t, 139t, 144, 191, 204–5, 213, 297,      human resource considerations, 244, 281
                    309, 336, 340, 367, 418–20                              HVAC (heating, ventilation and air-conditioning), 4, 75,
              federal                                                           132, 163t, 165, 169, 184, 212, 247, 254, 259, 269t,
                 courthouse, 450–66                                             274, 276, 282–3, 311, 326, 328t, 329, 331f, 333, 334,
                 office building, 388–404                                       336, 360f, 361t, 363, 371, 423–4
              FIATECH, 85–6, 131, 260
              field labor productivity, 8, 8f, 9–10, 24, 104, 199, 374      I
              file formats                                                  IAI. See International Alliance for Interoperability
                 for data exchange, 67–9                                    ICC. See International Code Council
                 types, 70–86                                               IDM. See Information Delivery Manual
              1st Pricing. See 1ST Pricing in Software Index                IFC. See Industry Foundation Classes
              4D                                                            IGES, 58, 60, 65–67, 70, 379, 380f, 385, 413
                 analysis, 19, 98t, 100–2, 221, 225–34, 427–9               Industry Foundation Classes (IFC), xii, xiii, 21, 58, 60–1,
                 CAD, 18, 207, 213–5, 224–7, 262, 267, 285, 289, 291,            65, 68–92, 124, 127–8, 130, 163t, 164t, 166, 171,
                    298, 427                                                     174, 267, 276, 291, 310, 313, 351, 355, 451,
              form.Z. See AutoDesSys in Software Index                           461–2, 463t,
              FRONT Inc., 405–418                                           Information Delivery Manual (IDM), 80
                                                                            information
              G                                                               development, 112t, 150, 154, 156–7, 177
              Gantt chart, 224–6, 252, 253f                                   visualization, 267, 304
              GC. See general contractor                                    IntelliCAD. See IntelliCAD Technology Consortium in
              GDL. See Graphisoft                                                Software Index
              GDS, xii, 27                                                  intelligent objects, 13, 53, 56, 111, 289–90, 342
              general arrangement drawings, 5                               Intergraph, 66
              general contractor (GC)                                       International Alliance for Interoperability (IAI), xii, 68,
                BIM guidelines, 212–5                                            71–3, 75f, 80, 82, 85–6, 130–1
                contract changes, 237–8                                     International Code Council (ICC), 82
                estimating, 218–23                                          interference checking. See clash detection
                planning, 224–34                                            interoperability, 65–91
              General Motors Production Plant, 99t, 100, 102, 113, 123,       costs of inadequate, 11–12
                  127, 135, 144, 146, 190, 252, 290, 324–39                   IFC. See Industry Foundation Classes
              General Services Administration (GSA), xii, 7, 35, 82–3,      ISO STEP, 58, 60, 65, 69–74, 78, 88, 90
                  106f, 120, 133, 136, 145, 171, 238, 288, 296, 309,          Part AP225, 71–2, 88
                  388, 393, 398–9, 404, 449–65                                Part AP241, 72
              Geographical Information Systems (GIS), 69t, 70, 86, 132,
                  301, 340t, 341, 355                                       J
              Georgia Institute of Technology, xiii, 72, 339, 388, 405,     Jackson Mississippi Courthouse, 144, 173, 450–66
                  417–8, 430, 465                                           Jacobs Engineering, 107, 450–1, 457, 460
              Ghafari Associates, 325, 328t, 451, 455                       JetStream software. See Navisworks in Software Index
              GIS. See Graphic Information Systems                          Jotne EDM. See EPM Technology in Software Index
              Global Positioning System (GPS), 238, 260,
                  309, 315                                                  K
              GM Flint Plant. See General Motors Production Plant           Kling Stubbins, 186f
              Graphisoft GDL (Graphical Modeling Language), 59,
                  67, 171                                                   L
              Green building. See sustainable construction                  labor productivity, 104, 199
              Gregory P. Luth and Associates, 181f, 432t, 439                 in construction, 8–10, 24, 374
              GSA. See General Services Administration                      Laser scanning (LADAR),166, 238, 260, 299, 315




bindex.indd 487                                                                                                                    12/17/07 8:17:29 PM
          488 Index
          lean                                                        O
             construction, 20, 104, 245, 249, 261–2, 286–8, 308,      ODBC, 58, 67, 169, 460
               313, 324–332, 358–370                                  offsite fabrication. See prefabrication
             design, 177, 314, 317, 330–332, 439                      OIE. See One Island East Tower
             production, 245, 261, 314–5, 338, 374                    Omniclass®,187, 192
          LEAP. See Leap Software in Software Index                   100 11th Avenue Apartments, 98, 248, 300, 405–18
          LEED, 301, 313, 355                                         One Island East Office Tower, 60, 98, 100, 112, 119, 122,
          Letterman Digital Arts Center (LDAC), 142, 237                   127, 133, 137–8, 142, 146, 219, 288, 291, 294, 418–30
          lifecycle                                                   Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), 85–6, 132
             cost, 96, 163, 322                                       Onuma Planning System. See Onuma and Associates in
             maintenance, 95                                               Software Index.
          lighting analysis, 46, 113, 155, 158, 162–3, 169–71, 454    operations simulation, 100–2, 108, 197, 293
          Little’s Law, 93                                            Oracle, 88, 290
          LKSoft IDA-STEP Database. See LKSoft in                     Ove Arup and Partners, 180, 375–88, 392t, 400f, 420,
               Software Index                                              452–4
                                                                      owner’s incentive fee plan, 118, 138, 141, 312, 367–72
          M
          made-to-order components, 189, 246, 283                     P
          made-to-stock components, 246, 283                          paperless construction, 51, 262–3
          Management Information Systems (MIS), 244, 263,             parametric
              266, 278                                                  custom objects, 25, 35–36, 56, 58–9, 309
          marketing and tendering, 233, 250, 277, 282–3                 components, 62, 2648, 279, 408–16
          mass customization, 245                                       cost estimate, 213–4, 219, 441–8
          Masterformat, 60,120, 186, 192, 195, 460                      objects, 14, 40, 44–45, 53, 190–3, 357
          Mechanical Electrical and Plumbing (MEP), 49, 182–3,          rules, 13–14, 17, 19, 24, 39–40, 58, 304
              243, 274                                                  3d modeling, 25–64, 67, 89, 150, 180–3, 253, 256–8,
          mechanical equipment simulation, 85, 89, 170                     287, 291, 304, 325, 407, 431
          MEP. See Mechanical Electrical and Plumbing                 Parametric Technologies Corporation (PTC), 29, 62
          Microsoft                                                   part library. See component library
            Excel, 56–8, 62, 120, 220, 344–5, 348, 380, 387, 408–9,   PCI. See Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute
              425–6, 433–4, 447, 460                                  PDA. See Personal Digital Assistant
            Project, 224, 229,231                                     PDF (Portable Document Format), 58, 87, 90
          model manager, 126, 203–4, 297                                3D PDF, 66, 69t, 86–7, 90f, 124, 125f, 250, 303, 438
            new role, 293, 312                                        Penn National Parking Structure, 98, 138, 169, 185,
          Model View Definition (MVD), 79, 87, 124                         250–1, 290, 293, 431–9
          model viewing software, 66, 124                             Personal Digital Assistant (PDA), 263, 307
          Morphosis, 190, 388–405                                     PipeDesigner 3D. See QuickPen in Software Index
          Mortenson, 13, 204, 234, 274–5                              portals,
                                                                        Web portals, 34, 344, 350–1, 421–2
          N                                                             content portals, 57, 192–6
          NASA, 27, 66                                                pre-assembly, 182, 244, 258, 262, 282, 290, 315, 336
          National Aquatics Center, ix, 294, 320–324, 375–388         Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute (PCI), 41, 80, 255
          National BIM Standards (NBIMS), 66, 80, 84, 138, 144,       precast concrete, 5, 9, 19–20, 40–8, 54, 61–2, 183, 197,
              237, 285, 290                                                210, 215, 237, 243, 247, 250–5, 263–73, 282, 299,
          National Institute for Building Sciences (NIBS),73, 80,          431–9
              237, 290                                                Precast Concrete Software Consortium (PCSC), 61, 270
          National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),      prefabricated assemblies, 139, 220, 245, 362–3, 371–4
              8, 11–12, 123, 163, 263                                 prefabrication, 101, 104, 112–3, 182–3, 208, 243–8, 258–9,
          NaturalWorks, 394–5, 404                                         262–7, 282, 290, 298, 306, 314–5, 329, 382, 405, 431
          Navisworks. See NavisWorks Ltd in Software Index            Primavera. See Primavera Systems in Software Index
          nD CAD, 291                                                   P6, 224
          NBIMS. See National BIM Standards                             Suretrak, 58, 138, 224, 229–32, 427
          NIBS. See National Institute of Building Sciences           procurement
          NIST. See National Institute of Standards                     methods or models, 7, 115, 119, 122, 132–3, 147, 150,
              and Technology                                               299, 305




bindex.indd 488                                                                                                              12/17/07 8:17:30 PM
                                                                                                                        Index   489
                tracking, 89, 236, 311                                      site planning, 51, 72, 155, 165, 184, 347, 459
              product                                                       sketching tools, 56, 158–160, 162, 164t
                cycle-time, 168, 188, 243, 248, 251–2, 261–2, 282–3,        SketchUp. See Google in Software Index
                   293, 385                                                 soft clash. See clash detection
                lifecycle management (PLM), 89                              SoftTech V6 Manufacturer. See SoftTech in Software Index
                model. See building product model                           Solibri. See Solibri in Software Index
                model repository. See building model repository             solid model, solid modeling, 26–27
                supplier libraries. See building element models             Solidworks. See Solidworks Inc in Software Index
              programming languages, 43, 59                                 SOM, 178f, 179f
              Project 4D. See Common Point, Inc. in Software Index          Sonata, xii, 27
              PTW Architects, 375–88                                        Space,
              pull flow, 104, 182, 249–51, 261–2, 267, 290, 338, 363, 368      modeling, 107f
                                                                               planning, 98t, 145, 160–161, 164t, 165, 171
              Q                                                                program validation, 121–122, 123f, 165, 171, 307,
              quality control, 5, 25, 182, 187, 255–6, 259–60, 282, 314,         462–463
                  419, 439                                                  SPeAR sustainability tool, 377
              quantity                                                      specialist coordinators, 248
                survey, 4, 455                                              specifications, 19, 140f, 186
                takeoff, 5, 78, 93, 96–8, 100, 120–1, 183, 208, 212–9,      SprinkCAD. See SprinkCAD in Software Index
                  418, 425–7, 432, 447                                      SQL, 65, 71
                                                                            STAAD Pro. See Bentley STAAD Pro in Software Index
              R                                                             Staffordshire Hospital, 259
              Radio-frequency identification (RFID) tags, 238, 260,         Statsbygg, 288
                   266, 276                                                 STL, 58, 60, 68, 69t, 164t
              RAM. See Ram International in Software Index                  STRAND. See Strand7 in Software Index
              reinforcing bars (rebar), 181, 185, 199, 220–3, 233, 247,     StruCAD. See AceCAD in Software Index
                   256–60, 263–72, 279–80, 291, 424, 437                    structural,
              Renaissance, 150, 187, 244                                       analysis, 61, 81, 169–71, 174, 270–3, 291, 302, 306,
              Request for Information (RFI) 6, 85, 123, 198, 327, 370            379–88, 413–15
              Revit. See Autodesk in Software Index                            design, 61, 81, 329–30, 367t, 384, 395, 431
              RFID tags. See Radio Frequency Identification Tags               optimization, 60, 180, 378–80, 384–8
              Rhino. See Rhinoceros in Software Index                       Structural Design Neutral File (SDNF), 60, 62, 328,
              ROBOT. See Robobat in Software Index                               333t, 383
              RUCAPS, xii, 27                                               structural steel,
              rule checking. See parametric rules.                             engineering and detailing, 65–7, 72, 183, 204, 247, 258,
                                                                                 263–7, 330, 433
              S                                                                fabrication and erection, 226, 245–6, 252, 257, 263,
              safety                                                             268–71
                evaluation, 19, 78, 103, 171, 385                              industry, 61, 71–2, 171, 237
                in construction, 216, 234, 234f, 235, 236, 307, 336,        Structureworks. See Structureworks in Software Index
                   337, 368t, 370, 372, 373, 385, 427, 430                  subcontractor, 217, 222f, 243–283, 328, 360–6,
              Sage Timberline. See Sage in Software Index                        372–3, 431
              San Francisco Federal Office Building (SFFB), 154, 177,       supply chain management (SCM), 9, 259, 282, 330
                   190, 291, 294, 388–405                                   Suretrak. See Primavera Suretrak
              SAP, 438, 439                                                 sustainable construction, 291, 301, 309
              SAT, 58, 60, 68, 69t                                          Sutter Health, 104, 135, 136, 288, 312, 358–374
              SCADA. See SCADA Soft AG in Software Index                    Swinerton, 217f
              scalability, 44, 52, 56, 57, 345                              Swire Properties, Ltd., 123, 133, 137, 288, 418–430
              SCM. See supply chain management                              Synchro. See Synchro in Software Index
              SDNF, 60, 61, 328t, 333t, 383                                 system optimization, 104, 141
              SDS/2. See Design Data in Software Index
              sheet metal ductwork, 19, 67, 237, 257, 274, 275, 331,        T
                   365, 367t                                                team collaboration, 20, 21, 116f, 117, 157, 173–174, 188,
              shop drawings, 5, 182, 189, 244, 249f, 251–2, 256–8, 262,         197, 201, 239, 299, 360
                   265, 270, 278, 330, 335, 361t, 376t, 398, 431, 437–9     Tekla Structures. See Tekla in Software Index




bindex.indd 489                                                                                                                  12/17/07 8:17:30 PM
          490 Index
          3D Studio Max. See Autodesk in Software Index                analysis, 157, 256, 431
          3D⫹. See CSC in Software Index                               natural, 38, 163, 177, 291, 390–5, 398–404
          tilt-up concrete, 243, 247                                View by View, 159f
          timber trusses, 61, 247, 247, 263, 265                    virtual construction, 94, 182, 242, 260, 262, 292
          topology, 46, 74, 75                                      Visual Basic, 61, 177, 179f, 385
          TriCad, 27                                                VPN Firewall (Virtual Private Network), 365
          Tron, 26                                                  VRML (Virtual Reality Model Language), 60, 79, 90f, 174,
          TurboCAD. See IMSI/Design in Software Index                    231, 263
          2D CAD. See CAD
                                                                    W
          U                                                         Walt Disney Concert Hall, 234f, 258
          unevaluated (shape or model), 27–28                       Walt Disney Imagineering, 106f, 453
          Uniformat, 47, 60, 121, 186, 187, 192, 195t, 444f, 449,   work-in-progress (WIP), 261
               460, 461
          URS Corporation, 101f                                     X
          user interface, 55–61                                     XML, 67–69, 84–86, 313, 344, 355
                                                                      aecXML, 69t, 85
          V                                                           BLIS-XML, 86
          value engineering, 2, 18, 137, 173, 188, 218, 293, 316      gbXML, 58, 59, 85, 129, 162, 163t, 164t
          VBA . See Visual Basic                                      IFCXML, 74, 75f, 86
          ventilation                                               Xsteel. See Tekla in Software Index




bindex.indd 490                                                                                                           12/17/07 8:17:31 PM
