    Order o f Optimizations
    This flowchart represents a recommended order for performing optim izations in an aggres­
    sive optimizing compiler. Other orders are possible, and the exam ples o f real-world compilers
    in Chapter 21 present several alternatives, though none o f them includes all o f the optim iza­
    tions in this diagram . The letters at the left in the diagram correspond to the levels o f code
    appropriate for the corresponding optim izations. The correspondence between letters and
    code levels is as follows:




A   These optim izations typically are applied either to source code or to a high-level intermediate
    code that preserves loop structure and the sequence in which operations are performed and
    that has array accesses in essentially their source-code form. Usually, these optimizations are
    done very early in the compilation process, since compilation tends to lower the level of the
    code as it proceeds from one phase to the next.
                                                                     (to constant folding, algebraic
                                                                   simplifications, and reassociation)
                                                                                   A
                       In-line expansion
                       Leaf-routine optimization
                       Shrink wrapping
                       Machine idioms
                       Tail merging
                       Branch optimizations and conditional
                         moves
                       Dead-code elimination
                       Software pipelining, with loop
                 D
                         unrolling, variable expansion, register
                         renaming, and hierarchical reduction
                       Basic-block and branch scheduling 1
                       Register allocation by graph coloring
                       Basic-block and branch scheduling 2
                       Intraprocedural I-cache optimization
                       Instruction prefetching
                       Data prefetching
                       Branch prediction



                       Interprocedural register allocation
                  E    Aggregation of global references
                       Interprocedural I-cache optimization



B, C   These optimizations are typically performed on medium- or low-level intermediate code,
       depending on the overall organization of the compiler. If code selection is done before all
       optimizations other than those in box A (known as the “ low-level” model of optimizer struc­
       ture), then these optimizations are performed on low-level code. If, on the other hand, some
       optimizations are performed on a medium-level, relatively machine-independent intermedi­
       ate code and others are performed on low-level code after code generation (known as the
       “ mixed” model), then these optimizations are generally done on the medium-level interme­
       diate code.
           The branches from C l to C2 and C3 represent a choice of the method used to perform
       essentially the same optimization (namely, moving computations to places where they are per­
       formed less frequently without changing the semantics of the program). They also represent
       a choice of the data-flow analyses used to perform the optimization.
  D    These optimizations are almost always done on a low-level form of code—one that may
       be quite machine-dependent (e.g., a structured assembly language) or that may be somewhat
       more general, such as the low-level intermediate code used in this book— because they require
       that addresses have been turned into the form required by the target processor and because
       several of them require low-level control-flow code.
  E    These optimizations are performed at link time, so they operate on relocatable object code.
       Three optimizations, namely, constant folding, algebraic simplification, and reassociation,
       are in boxes connected to the other phases of the optimization process by dotted lines because
       they are best structured as subroutines that can be invoked whenever they are needed.
            A version of this diagram appears in Chapters 1 and 11 through 20 to guide the reader
       in ordering optimizer components in a compiler.
Advanced Compiler Design
     and Implementation




Steven S. Muchnick
Senior Editor Denise E. M. Penrose
Director o f Production and Manufacturing    Yonie Overton
Senior Production Editor Cheri Palmer
Editorial Coordinator Jane Elliott
Cover Design Ross Carron Design
Text Design, Composition, and Illustration   Windfall Software
Copyeditor Jeff Van Bueren
Proofreader Jennifer McClain
Indexer Ty Koontz
Printer Courier Corporation

ACADEMIC PRESS
A Harcourt Science and Technology Company
525 B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego, CA 92101-4495, USA
http:/lwww.academicpress.com

Academic Press
Harcourt Place, 32 Jamestown Road, London, NW1 7BY, United Kingdom
http:llwww.academicpress.com

Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
340 Pine Street, Sixth Floor, San Francisco, CA 94104-3205, USA
http://www.mkp.com

© 1997 by Academic Press
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America

04   03            6

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise—without the prior written permission of the publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Muchnick, Steven S., date.
    Advanced compiler design and implementation / Steve Muchnick.
       p. cm.
    Includes bibliographical references and index.
    ISBN 1-55860-320-4
    1. Compilers (Computer programs) 2. Systems programming (Computer
 science). I. Title.
 QA76.76.C65M 8 1997
 005.4'53—dc21                                                  97-13063
                                                                     CIP
To Eric, nihil sine quo
                                                                 Foreword




C
           ompiler design has been an active topic of research and development since
           the mid-1950s. Fortran, the first widely used higher-level language, suc­
           ceeded, in large part, because of the high quality of its early compilers. John
           Backus and his colleagues at IBM recognized that programmers would not give up
the detailed design control they had with assembly language unless the performance
of compiled code was sufficiently close to the performance of handwritten machine
code. Backus’s group invented several key concepts that underlie the topics in this
book. Among them are the treatment of array indexes in loop optimization and
methods for local register allocation. Since that time, both researchers and practi­
tioners have improved and supplanted them (repeatedly) with more effective ones.
     In light of the long history of compiler design, and its standing as a relatively
mature computing technology, why, one might ask, should there be a new book in
the field? The answer is clear. Compilers are tools that generate efficient mappings
from programs to machines. The language designs continue to change, the target
architectures continue to change, and the programs become ever more ambitious
in their scale and complexity. Thus, while the compiler design problem remains
the same at a high level, as we zoom in, it is continually changing. Furthermore,
the computational resources we can bring to bear in the compilers themselves are
increasing. Consequently, modern compilers use more time- and space-intensive
algorithms than were possible before. And, of course, researchers continue to invent
new and better techniques for solving conventional compiler design problems. In
fact, an entire collection of topics in this book are direct consequences of changes in
computer architecture.
     This book takes on the challenges of contemporary languages and architectures
and prepares the reader for the new compiling problems that will inevitably arise
in the future. For example, in Chapter 3 the book builds on the reader’s knowledge
of symbol tables and local scope structure to describe how to deal with imported
and exported scopes as found in Ada, Modula-2, and other modern languages. And,
since run-time environments model the dynamic semantics of source languages, the
discussion of advanced issues in run-time support in Chapter 5, such as compiling
shared objects, is particularly valuable. That chapter also addresses the rich type
systems found in some modern languages and the diverse strategies for parameter
passing dictated by modern architectures.

                                                                              vii
viii   Foreword


            No compiler book would be complete without a chapter on code generation.
       The early work in code generation provided approaches to designing handcrafted
       instruction-selection routines and intermixing instruction selection with register
       management. The treatment of code generation in Chapter 6 describes automated
       techniques based on pattern matching, made possible not only by compiler research
       but also by simpler and more orthogonal instruction sets and by the feasibility of
       constructing and traversing intermediate-code trees in a compiler.
            Optimization is the heart of advanced compiler design and the core of this
       book. Much theoretical work has gone into program analysis, both for the sake
       of optimization and for other purposes. Chapters 7 through 10 revisit what are,
       by now, the classic analysis methods, along with newer and more efficient ones
       previously described only in research papers. These chapters take a collection of
       diverse techniques and organize them into a unified whole. This synthesis is, in itself,
       a significant contribution to compiler design. Most of the chapters that follow use
       the analyses to perform optimizing transformations.
            The large register sets in recent systems motivate the material on register allo­
       cation in Chapter 16, which synthesizes over a decade of advances in algorithms
       and heuristics for this problem. Also, an important source of increased speed is
       concurrency—the ability to do several things at once. In order to translate a sequen­
       tial program into one that can exploit hardware concurrency, the compiler may need
       to rearrange parts of the computation in a way that preserves correctness and in­
       creases parallelism. Although a full treatment of concurrency is beyond the scope of
       this book, it does focus on instruction-level parallelism, which motivates the discus­
       sion of dependence analysis in Chapter 9 and the vital topic of code scheduling in
       Chapter 17.
            Chapter 20, on optimization for the memory hierarchy, is also motivated by
       modern target machines, which introduce a diversity of relative speeds of data access
       in order to cope with the increasing gap between processor and memory speeds.
       An additional chapter available from the publisher’s World Wide Web site discusses
       object-code translation, which builds on compiler technology to translate programs
       for new architectures, even when the source programs are unavailable.
            The importance of interprocedural analysis and optimization has increased as
       new language designs have encouraged programmers to use more sophisticated
       methods for structuring large programs. Its feasibility has increased as the analysis
       methods have been refined and tuned and as faster computers have made the requi­
       site analyses acceptably fast. Chapter 19 is devoted to the determination and use of
       interprocedural information.
            Compiler design is, in its essence, an engineering activity. The methods that are
       used must be ones that provide good solutions to the translation situations that
       arise in practice—namely, real programs written in real languages executing on real
       machines. Most of the time, the compiler writer must take the languages and the
       machines as they come. Rarely is it possible to influence or improve the design of
       either. It is the engineering choices of what analyses and transformations to perform
       and when to perform them that determine the speed and quality of an optimizing
       compiler. Both in the treatment of the optimization material throughout the book
       and in the case studies in Chapter 21, these design choices are paramount.
Foreword                                                                          IX



     One of the great strengths of the author, Steve Muchnick, is the wealth and di­
versity of his experience. After an early career as a professor of computer science,
Dr. Muchnick applied his knowledge of compilers as a vital member of the teams
that developed two important computer architectures, namely, pa-risc at Hewlett-
Packard and sparc at Sun Microsystems. After the initial work on each architecture
was completed, he served as the leader of the advanced compiler design and im­
plementation groups for these systems. Those credentials stand him in good stead
in deciding what the reader needs to know about advanced compiler design. His
research experience, coupled with his hands-on development experience, are invalu­
able in guiding the reader through the many design decisions that a compiler designer
must make.

                                                                     Susan Graham
                                                  University of California, Berkeley
                                                                        Contents




    Foreword by Susan Graham             vii
    Preface    xxi

1 Introduction to Advanced Topics                         1
    1.1       Review of Compiler Structure       1
    1.2       Advanced Issues in Elementary Topics        3
    1.3       The Importance of Code Optimization         6
    1.4       Structure of Optimizing Compilers      7
    1.5       Placement of Optimizations in Aggressive
              Optimizing Compilers 11
    1.6       Reading Flow Among the Chapters        14
    1.7       Related Topics Not Covered in This Text         16
    1.8       Target Machines Used in Examples       16
    1.9       Number Notations and Data Sizes        16
    1.10      Wrap-Up     17
    1.11      Further Reading       18
    1.12      Exercises   18

2   Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)                         19
    2.1       Extended Backus-Naur Form Syntax Notation            19
    2.2       Introduction to ICAN         20
    2.3       A Quick Overview of ICAN          23
    2.4       Whole Programs        25
    2.5       Type Definitions      25
    2.6       Declarations     26

                                                                               xi
xii       Contents


          2.7    Data Types and Expressions       27
          2.8    Statements     36
          2.9    Wrap-Up 41
          2.10   Further Reading      41
          2.11   Exercises 41

      3   Symbol-Table Structure                 43
          3.1    Storage Classes, Visibility, and Lifetimes           43
          3.2    Symbol Attributes and Symbol-Table Entries                 45
          3.3    Local Symbol-Table Management              47
          3.4    Global Symbol-Table Structure         49
          3.5    Storage Binding and Symbolic Registers               54
          3.6    Approaches to Generating Loads and Stores                  59
          3.7    Wrap-Up 64
          3.8    Further Reading      64
          3.9    Exercises 64

      4   Intermediate Representations                      67
          4.1    Issues in Designing an Intermediate Language                   67
          4.2    High-Level Intermediate Languages           69
          4.3    Medium-Level Intermediate Languages                  71
          4.4    Low-Level Intermediate Languages            71
          4.5    Multi-Level Intermediate Languages              72
          4.6    Our Intermediate Languages: MIR, HIR, and LIR                       73
          4.7    Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN                    81
          4.8    ICAN Naming of Data Structures and Routines that Manipulate
                 Intermediate Code 92
          4.9    Other Intermediate-Language Forms               96
          4.10   Wrap-Up 101
          4.11   Further Reading      102
          4.12   Exercises 102

      5   Run-Time Support                 105
          5.1    Data Representations and Instructions            106
          5.2    Register Usage      109
    Contents                                                                             xiii

    5.3        The Local Stack Frame         111
    5.4        The Run-Time Stack          114
    5.5        Parameter-Passing Disciplines           116
    5.6        Procedure Prologues, Epilogues, Calls, and Returns
    5.7        Code Sharing and Position-Independent Code              127
    5.8        Symbolic and Polymorphic Language Support               131
    5.9        Wrap-Up     133
    5.10       Further Reading       134
    5.11       Exercises   135

6   Producing Code Generators Automatically                                  137
    6.1        Introduction to Automatic Generation of Code Generators             138
    6.2        A Syntax-Directed Technique             139
    6.3        Introduction to Semantics-Directed Parsing            159
    6.4        Tree Pattern Matching and Dynamic Programming                 160
    6.5        Wrap-Up 165
    6.6        Further Reading       166
    6.7        Exercises 166

7   Control-Flow Analysis                        169
    7.1        Approaches to Control-Flow Analysis             172
    7.2        Depth-First Search, Preorder Traversal, Postorder Traversal, and
               Breadth-First Search 177
    7.3        Dominators and Postdominators             181
    7.4        Loops and Strongly Connected Components                191
    7.5        Reducibility   196
    7.6        Interval Analysis and Control Trees           197
    7.7        Structural Analysis     202
    7.8        Wrap-Up 214
    7.9        Further Reading      214
    7.10       Exercises 215

8   Data-Flow Analysis                     217
    8.1        An Example: Reaching Definitions              218
    8.2        Basic Concepts: Lattices, Flow Functions, and Fixed Points          223
xiv        Contents


           8.3    Taxonomy of Data-Flow Problems and Solution Methods               228
           8.4    Iterative Data-Flow Analysis        231
           8.5    Lattices of Flow Functions        235
           8.6    Control-Tree-Based Data-Flow Analysis           236
           8.7    Structural Analysis     236
           8.8    Interval Analysis     249
           8.9    Other Approaches        250
           8.10   Du-Chains, Ud-Chains, and Webs            251
           8.11   Static Single-Assignment (SSA) Form           252
           8.12   Dealing with Arrays, Structures, and Pointers 258
           8.13   Automating Construction of Data-Flow Analyzers 259
           8.14   More Ambitious Analyses           261
           8.15   Wrap-Up 263
           8.16   Further Reading     264
           8.17   Exercises   265



      9    Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs                            267
           9.1    Dependence Relations 267
           9.2    Basic-Block Dependence DAGs             269
           9.3    Dependences in Loops 274
           9.4    Dependence Testing        279
           9.5    Program-Dependence Graphs           284
           9.6    Dependences Between Dynamically Allocated Objects           286
           9.7    Wrap-Up     288
           9.8    Further Reading     289
           9.9    Exercises   290



      10   Alias Analysis           293
           10.1   Aliases in Various Real Programming Languages         297
           10.2   The Alias Gatherer      302
           10.3   The Alias Propagator        307
           10.4   Wrap-Up     314
           10.5   Further Reading     315
           10.6   Exercises   316
     Contents                                                                              XV



11   Introduction to Optimization                      319
     11.1       Global Optimizations Discussed in Chapters 12 Through 18             321
     11.2       Flow Sensitivity and May vs. Must Information            323
     11.3       Importance of Individual Optimizations       323
     11.4       Order and Repetition of Optimizations        325
     11.5       Further Reading    328
     11.6       Exercises   328


12   Early Optimizations                  329
     12.1       Constant-Expression Evaluation (Constant Folding)              329
     12.2       Scalar Replacement of Aggregates       331
     12.3       Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation        333
     12.4       Value Numbering     343
     12.5       Copy Propagation        356
     12.6       Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation        362
     12.7       Wrap-Up     371
     12.8       Further Reading    373
     12.9       Exercises   374


13   Redundancy Elimination                     377
     13.1       Common-Subexpression Elimination         378
     13.2       Loop-Invariant Code Motion       397
     13.3       Partial-Redundancy Elimination     407
     13.4       Redundancy Elimination and Reassociation           415
     13.5       Code Hoisting     417
     13.6       Wrap-Up     420
     13.7       Further Reading    422
     13.8       Exercises   422


14   Loop Optimizations                  425
     14.1       Induction-Variable Optimizations       425
     14.2       Unnecessary Bounds-Checking Elimination            454
     14.3       Wrap-Up     457
     14.4       Further Reading    459
     14.5       Exercises   460
XVI        Contents


      15   Procedure Optimizations                   461
           15.1   Tail-Call Optimization and Tail-Recursion Elimination        461
           15.2   Procedure Integration        465
           15.3   In-Line Expansion 470
           15.4   Leaf-Routine Optimization and Shrink Wrapping          472
           15.5   Wrap-Up 476
           15.6   Further Reading       478
           15.7   Exercises   478


      16   Register Allocation               481
           16.1   Register Allocation and Assignment         482
           16.2   Local Methods        483
           16.3   Graph Coloring       485
           16.4   Priority-Based Graph Coloring        524
           16.5   Other Approaches to Register Allocation          525
           16.6   Wrap-Up     526
           16.7   Further Reading       528
           16.8   Exercises   529


      17   Code Scheduling              531
           17.1   Instruction Scheduling       532
           17.2   Speculative Loads and Boosting       547
           17.3   Speculative Scheduling       548
           17.4   Software Pipelining        548
           17.5   Trace Scheduling      569
           17.6   Percolation Scheduling       571
           17.7   Wrap-Up     573
           17.8   Further Reading      575
           17.9   Exercises   576


      18   Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations                        579
           18.1   Unreachable-Code Elimination         580
           18.2   Straightening 583
           18.3   If Simplifications    585
           18.4   Loop Simplifications        586
     Contents                                                               XVII


     18.5       Loop Inversion 587
     18.6       Unswitching 588
     18.7       Branch Optimizations   589
     18.8       Tail Merging or Cross Jumping   590
     18.9       Conditional Moves 591
     18.10      Dead-Code Elimination 592
     18.11      Branch Prediction 597
     18.12      Machine Idioms and Instruction Combining   599
     18.13      Wrap-Up 602
     18.14      Further Reading 604
     18.15      Exercises 605



19   Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization                     607
     19.1       Interprocedural Control-Flow Analysis: The Call Graph 609
     19.2       Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis 619
     19.3       Interprocedural Constant Propagation 637
     19.4       Interprocedural Alias Analysis 641
     19.5       Interprocedural Optimizations 656
     19.6       Interprocedural Register Allocation 659
     19.7       Aggregation of Global References 663
     19.8       Other Issues in Interprocedural Program Management 663
     19.9       Wrap-Up 664
     19.10      Further Reading 666
     19.11      Exercises 667


20   Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy                       669
     20.1       Impact of Data and Instruction Caches 670
     20.2       Instruction-Cache Optimization 672
     20.3       Scalar Replacement of Array Elements 682
     20.4       Data-Cache Optimization 687
     20.5       Scalar vs. Memory-Oriented Optimizations 700
     20.6       Wrap-Up 700
     20.7       Further Reading 703
     20.8       Exercises 704
xviii        Contents


        21     Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends                               705
             21.1       The Sun Compilers for SPARC      707
             21.2       The IBM XL Compilers for the POWER and PowerPC
                        Architectures 716
             21.3       Digital Equipment’s Compilers for Alpha      726
             21.4       The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386 Architecture
                        Family 734
             21.5       Wrap-Up 744
             21.6       Future Trends in Compiler Design and Implementation          745
             21.7       Further Reading     746

  App. A     Guide to Assembly Languages Used in This Book                                 747
             A.     1      Sun SPARC Versions 8 and 9 Assembly Language            747
             A.2        IBM POWER and PowerPC Assembly Language              749
             A.3        DEC Alpha Assembly Language       750
             A.4        Intel 386 Architecture Assembly Language      752
             A.5        Hewlett-Packard’s PA-RISC Assembly Language         753


  App. B     Representation of Sets, Sequences, Trees, DAGs, and
             Functions    757
             B.     l Representation of Sets       759
             B.2        Representation of Sequences      763
             B.3        Representation of Trees and DAGs       763
             B.4        Representation of Functions      764
             B.     5 Further Reading       765


  App. C     Software Resources                   767
             C .l       Finding and Accessing Software on the Internet      767
             C.2        Machine Simulators        767
             C.3        Compilers 768
             C.4        Code-Generator Generators: BURG and IBURG           769
             C.5        Profiling Tools   770


             List of Illustrations    773
Contents


List of Tables   797
Bibliography     801
Technical Index of Mathematical Formulas and ican Procedures
and Major Data Structures 821
Subject Index    827
                                                                         Preface




T
         his book concerns advanced issues in the design and implementation of
         compilers, for uniprocessors, with its major emphasis (over 60% of the
         text) on optimization. While it does consider machines with instruction-level
         parallelism, we ignore almost completely the issues of large-scale parallelization and
vectorization.
    It begins with material on compiler structure, symbol-table management (includ­
ing languages that allow scopes to be imported and exported), intermediate code
structure, run-time support issues (including shared objects that can be linked to
at run time), and automatic generation of code generators from machine descrip­
tions. Next it explores methods for intraprocedural (conventionally called global)
control-flow, data-flow, dependence, and alias analyses. Then a series of groups of
global optimizations are described, including ones that apply to program compo­
nents from simple expressions to whole procedures. Next, interprocedural analyses
of control flow, data flow, and aliases are described, followed by interprocedural
optimizations and use of interprocedural information to improve global optimiza­
tions. We then discuss optimizations designed to make effective use of the memory
hierarchy. Finally, we describe four commercial compiler systems in detail, namely,
ones from Digital Equipment Corporation, IBM, Intel, and Sun Microsysytems, to
provide specific examples of approaches to compiler structure, intermediate-code de­
sign, optimization choices, and effectiveness. As we shall see, these compiler systems
represent a wide range of approaches and often achieve similar results in different
ways.


How This Book Came to Be Written
In June 1990 and 1991, while a Distinguished Engineer at Sun Microsystems,
I presented a half-day tutorial entitled “Advanced Compiling Techniques for R is e
Systems” at the annual ACM sigplan Conference on Programming Language De­
sign and Implementation. The tutorial was based on approximately 130 transparen­
cies on RISC architectures and relevant issues in compilers, particularly optimization.
I left that experience with the idea that somewhere within the material covered there
was a seed (the mental image was, in fact, of an acorn) yearning for sun, soil, and
water to help it grow into the mature oak tree of a book you have before you. Over

                                                                                   xxi
xxii   Preface


       a year later I discussed this idea with Wayne Rosing, then President of Sun Microsys­
       tems Laboratories, and within a few weeks he decided to nurture this project with a
       year-and-a-half’s worth of partial funding.
           The first draft that resulted included quite a lot of material on R i s e architectures,
       as well as material on advanced compilation issues. Before long (with the help of
       three reviewers) I had decided that there was little point in including the architecture
       material in the book. New R i s e architectures are being developed quite frequently,
       the kind of coverage of them that is needed is provided in architecture courses at
       most universities, and the real strengths of the text were in the compiler material.
           This resulted in a major change of direction. Most of the architecture material
       was dropped, keeping just those parts that support decisions on how to proceed
       in compilation; the focus of the compiler material was broadened to provide equal
       coverage of ciscs; and it was decided to focus entirely on uniprocessors and to
       leave it to other texts to discuss parallelization and vectorization. The focus of the
       compilation material was deepened and, in some respects narrowed and in others
       broadened (for example, material on hand-crafted code generation was dropped
       almost entirely, while advanced methods of scheduling, such as trace and percolation
       scheduling, were added). The result is what you see before you.


       About the Cover
       The design on the cover is of a Chilkat blanket from the author’s collection of
       Northwest Coast native art. The blanket was woven of fine strands of red-cedar
       inner bark and mountain-goat wool in the late 19th century by a Tlingit woman
       from southeastern Alaska. It generally took six to nine months of work to complete
       such a blanket. The blanket design is divided into three panels, and the center panel
       depicts a diving whale. The head is the split image at the bottom; the body is the
       panel with the face in the center (a panel that looks like a face never represents the
       face in this iconography); the lateral fins are at the sides of the body; and the tail
       flukes are at the top. Each part of the design is, in itself, functional but meaningless;
       assembled together in the right way, the elements combine to depict a diving whale
       and proclaim the rights and prerogatives of the village chief who owned the blanket.
            In a similar way, each component of a compiler is functional, but it is only when
       the components are put together in the proper way that they serve their overall
       purpose. Designing and weaving such a blanket requires skills that are akin to
       those involved in constructing industrial-strength compilers—each discipline has a
       set of required tools, materials, design elements, and overall patterns that must be
       combined in a way that meets the prospective users’ needs and desires.


       Audience for This Book
       This book is intended for computer professionals, graduate students, and advanced
       undergraduates who need to understand the issues involved in designing and con­
       structing advanced compilers for uniprocessors. The reader is assumed to have had
       introductory courses in data structures, algorithms, compiler design and implemen-
Preface                                                                            xxiii


tation, computer architecture, and assembly-language programming, or equivalent
work experience.


Overview of the Book’s Contents
This volume is divided into 21 chapters and three appendices as follows:

Chapter 1. Introduction to Advanced Topics
This chapter introduces the subject of the book, namely, advanced topics in the de­
sign and construction of compilers, and discusses compiler structure, the importance
of optimization, and how the rest of the material in the book works together.

Chapter 2. Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)
Chapter 2 describes and gives examples of an informal programming notation called
ican that is used to present algorithms in the text. After describing the notation used
to express the language’s syntax, it gives a brief overview of ican , followed by a
detailed description of the language. The brief description should be sufficient for
reading most of the algorithms presented and the full description should need to be
referred to only rarely.

Chapter 3. Symbol-Table Structure
Chapter 3 first discusses the attributes of variables, such as storage class, visibility,
volatility, scope, size, type, alignment, structure, addressing method, and so on.
Then it describes effective methods for structuring and managing local and global
symbol tables, including importation and exportation of scopes (as found, e.g., in
Ada, Mesa, and Modula-2); storage binding; and approaches to generating load and
store instructions that take the above characteristics into account.

Chapter 4. Intermediate Representations
This chapter focuses on intermediate language design, three specific intermediate lan­
guages used in the remainder of the book, and other basic forms of intermediate code
that might be used in a compiler. We use three closely related intermediate forms,
one high-level, one medium-level, and one low-level, to allow us to demonstrate vir­
tually all the optimizations discussed. We also discuss the relative importance and
usefulness of our chosen forms and the others.
     Two other more elaborate forms of intermediate code, namely, static single­
assignment (SSA) form and program dependence graphs, are discussed in Sec­
tions 8.11 and 9.5, respectively.

Chapter 5. Run-Time Support
Chapter 5 concerns the issues involved in supporting programs written in high-level
languages at run time. It discusses data representation, register usage, design of the
stack frame and overall run-time stack, parameter passing, procedure structure and
X X IV   Preface


         linkage, procedure-valued variables, code sharing, position-independent code, and
         issues involved in supporting symbolic and polymorphic languages.

         Chapter 6. Producing Code Generators Automatically
         Chapter 6 discusses automatic approaches for producing code generators from ma­
         chine descriptions. We present the Graham-Glanville syntax-directed technique in
         detail and introduce two other approaches, namely, semantics-directed parsing and
         tree pattern matching.

         Chapter 7. Control-Flow Analysis
         This and the following three chapters discuss four types of analyses that apply to
         procedures and that are vital to doing correct and ambitious optimization.
               Chapter 7 concentrates on approaches to determining the control flow within
         a procedure and to constructing a control-flow graph (CFG). It begins with an
         overview of the possible approaches and then discusses three of them in detail. The
         first is the classic approach of using depth-first search and dominators. In this area
         we also discuss flowgraph traversals, such as preorder and postorder, of the CFG
         and finding the strongly connected components of a CFG. The other two approaches
         depend on the concept of reducibility, which allows the control flow of a procedure
         to be composed hierarchically. One of the two is called interval analysis and the other
         is called structural analysis, and the two differ in what types of structural units they
         distinguish. We also discuss the representation of a procedure’s hierarchical structure
         by a so-called control tree.

         Chapter 8. Data-Flow Analysis
         Chapter 8 discusses approaches to determining the flow of data in a procedure. It
         begins with an example and next discusses the basic mathematical concepts un­
         derlying data-flow analysis, namely, lattices, flow functions, and fixed points. It
         continues with a taxonomy of data-flow problems and solution methods and then
         proceeds to discuss in detail three techniques for solving data-flow problems that
         correspond to the three approaches to control-flow analysis presented in the preced­
         ing chapter. The first approach is iterative data-flow analysis, which corresponds to
         the use of depth-first search and dominators. The other two approaches correspond
         to the control-tree-based approaches to control-flow analysis and are known by the
         same names as those analyses: interval analysis and structural analysis. This is fol­
         lowed by an overview of a new sparse technique known as slotwise analysis, and
         descriptions of methods of representing data-flow information, namely, du-chains,
         ud-chains, webs, and static single-assignment (or SSA) form. The chapter concludes
         with thoughts on how to deal with arrays, structures, and pointers and with a dis­
         cussion of a method for automating construction of data-flow analyzers.

         Chapter 9. Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs
         Chapter 9 concerns dependence analysis, which is a poor-man’s version of data-flow
         analysis for arrays and low-level storage references, and a closely related intermedi­
         ate code form known as the program dependence graph. It first discusses dependence
Preface                                                                           XXV



relations and then how to compute dependence relations within a basic block, which
is vital to the code-scheduling techniques discussed in Chapter 17. Next it discusses
dependence in loops and methods of doing dependence testing, which are essential to
the data-storage optimizations discussed in Chapter 20. Finally, it discusses the pro­
gram dependence graph, which is an intermediate-code form that represents control
and data dependences directly, and that can be used to perform a series of optimiza­
tions more effectively than on an intermediate code that leaves such information
implicit.

Chapter 10. Alias Analysis
Chapter 10 discusses alias analysis, which determines whether a storage location
may be accessible by more than one access path, such as by name and through a
pointer. It discusses how aliases may impact programs in specific languages, such as
Fortran 77, Pascal, C, and Fortran 90. Next it discusses a very general approach
to determining the aliases present in a procedure that consists of a language-specific
alias gatherer and a language-independent alias propagator. The alias gatherer and
propagator can be tailored to provide information that depends or not on the control
flow of the procedure and that also provides information in a variety of other ways,
making it a general approach that can be suited to the needs and time constraints of
a particular programming language and compiler.

Chapter 11. Introduction to Optimization
Chapter 11 introduces the subject of code optimization, discusses the fact that the
applicability and effectiveness of most optimizations are recursively undecidable but
still worthwhile for programs for which they are determinable, and provides a quick
survey of the intraprocedural optimizations covered in Chapters 12 through 18. It
then discusses flow sensitivity and may vs. must information and how they apply to
optimization, the relative importance of particular optimizations, and the order in
which they should be performed.

Chapter 12. Early Optimizations
Chapter 12 discusses optimizations that are usually performed early in the opti­
mization process, namely, scalar replacement of aggregates, local and global value
numbering (performed on SSA-form code), local and global copy propagation, and
sparse conditional constant propagation (also performed on SSA-form code). It also
discusses constant expression evaluation (or constant folding) and algebraic simpli­
fication and how they are best included in an optimizer as subroutines that can be
called from wherever they are needed.

Chapter 13. Redundancy Elimination
Chapter 13 concerns several types of redundancy elimination, which, in essence,
delete computations that are performed more than once on a path through a pro­
cedure. It describes local and global common-subexpression elimination, forward
substitution, loop-invariant code motion, partial-redundancy elimination, and code
hoisting.
xxvi   Preface


       Chapter 14. Loop Optimizations
       Chapter 14 deals with optimizations that apply to loops, including identification
       of induction variables, strength reduction, removal of induction variables, linear-
       function test replacement, elimination of unnecessary bounds checking.

       Chapter 15. Procedure Optimizations
       Chapter 15 presents optimizations that apply to procedures as units of code. It
       discusses tail-call optimization (including tail-recursion elimination), procedure in­
       tegration, in-line expansion, leaf-routine optimization, and shrink wrapping.

       Chapter 16. Register Allocation
       Chapter 16 concerns intraprocedural register allocation and assignment. First it
       discusses local, cost-based methods and then an approach that uses graph coloring.
       We discuss webs as the allocatable objects, the interference graph, coloring the
       interference graph, and generating spill code. This is followed by a brief presentation
       of approaches to register allocation that use a procedure’s control tree.

       Chapter 17. Code Scheduling
       Chapter 17 concerns local and global instruction scheduling, which reorders instruc­
       tions to take best advantage of the pipelines built into modern processors. There
       are two issues in local scheduling, namely, list scheduling, which deals with the
       sequence of instructions within a basic block, and branch scheduling, which deals
       with connections between blocks. We next consider approaches to scheduling across
       basic-block boundaries, including speculative loads and boosting. Next we discuss
       two approaches to software pipelining, called window scheduling and unroll and
       compact. Next we discuss loop unrolling, variable expansion, and register renaming,
       all of which increase the freedom available to scheduling, and hierarchical reduc­
       tion, which deals with control structures embedded in loops. We finish the chapter
       with two global approaches to scheduling, namely, trace scheduling and percolation
       scheduling.

       Chapter 18. Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations
       Chapter 18 deals with control-flow optimizations and ones that are generally per­
       formed on a low-level form of intermediate code or on an assembly-language-like
       representation. These include unreachable-code elimination, straightening, if sim­
       plification, loop simplifications, loop inversion, unswitching, branch optimizations,
       tail merging (also called cross jumping), use of conditional move instructions, dead-
       code elimination, in-line expansion, branch prediction, machine idioms, instruction
       combining, and register coalescing or subsumption.

       Chapter 19. Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization
       Chapter 19 concerns extending analysis and optimization to deal with whole pro­
       grams. It discusses interprocedural control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, alias
       analysis, and transformations. It presents two approaches each to flow-insensitive
Preface                                                                              xxvii


side effect and alias analysis, along with approaches to computing flow-sensitive
side effects and doing interprocedural constant propagation. Next it discusses inter­
procedural optimizations and applying interprocedural information to optimization
within procedures, followed by interprocedural register allocation and aggregation
of global references. It concludes with a discussion of how to integrate interproce­
dural analysis and optimization into the order of optimizations.


Chapter 20. Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy
Chapter 20 discusses optimization to take better advantage of the memory hierar­
chy found in most systems and specifically of cache memories. We first discuss the
impact of data and instruction caches on program performance. We next consider
instruction-cache optimization, including instruction prefetching, procedure sorting,
procedure and block placement, intraprocedural code positioning, procedure split­
ting, and combining intra- and interprocedural methods.
     Next we discuss data-cache optimization, focusing mostly on loop transforma­
tions. Rather than providing a full treatment of this topic, we cover some parts of
it in detail, such as scalar replacement of array elements and data prefetching, and
for others give only an outline of the definitions, terminology, and techniques, and
issues involved and examples of the techniques. The latter topics include data reuse,
locality, tiling, and the interaction of scalar and memory-oriented optimizations. We
take this approach because the research on this subject is still too new to warrant
selection of a definitive method.


Chapter 21. Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends
Chapter 21 presents four case studies of commercial compiling systems that include
a wide range of target architectures, compiler designs, intermediate-code representa­
tions, and optimizations. The four architectures are Sun Microsystems’ sparc , IBM’s
power (and PowerPC), the Digital Equipment Alpha, and the Intel 386 family. For
each, we first discuss the architecture briefly and then present the hardware vendor’s
compilers for it.


Appendix A. Guide to Assembly Languages Used in This Book
Appendix A presents a short description of each of the assembly languages used
in the text, so as to make the code examples more easily accessible. This includes
discussion of the sparc , power (and PowerPC), Alpha, Intel 386 architecture family,
and pa-risc assembly languages.


Appendix B. Representation of Sets, Sequences, Trees, DAGs, and Functions
Appendix B provides a quick review of concrete representations for most of the ab­
stract data structures in the text. It is not a substitute for a course in data structures,
but a ready reference to some of the issues and approaches.
Preface


Appendix C. Software Resources
Appendix C is concerned with software accessible via anonymous FTP or on the
World Wide Web that can be used as a basis for compiler implementation projects
in the classroom and, in some cases, in industrial settings also.

Bibliography
Finally, the bibliography presents a wide range of sources for further reading in the
topics covered in the text.

Indexes
The book ends with two indexes, one of which lists mathematical formulas, ican
functions, and major ican data structures.


Supplements, Resources, and Web Extensions

Several exercises appear at the end of each chapter. Advanced exercises are marked
ADV in the left margin, and research exercises are marked RSCH. Solu­
tions for selected exercises are available electronically from the publisher. Book-
related materials can be found on the World Wide Web at the URL for this book
h t t p : //www. mkp. com /b ook s_catalog/1-55860-320-4. a s p . Instructors should
contact the publisher directly to obtain solutions to exercises.

Resources
Appendix C, as described above, concerns free software designed for student
compiler-construction projects and how to obtain it electronically. The entire ap­
pendix, with links to these addresses, can be accessed at the URL listed above.

Web Extension
Additional material concerned with object-code translation, an approach to produc­
ing machine code for an architecture from code for another architecture, rather than
from source code, is available from the publisher’s World Wide Web site, at the URL
listed above. The Web Extension discusses the principles of object-code compilation
and then focuses on three examples, Hewlett-Packard’s HP3000 h :o- pa-risc transla­
tor OCT and Digital Equipment Corporation’s VAX VMS-to-Alpha translator vest
and its MiPS-to-Alpha translator mx.


Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would like to thank my former colleagues at Sun Microsystems
without whose support and encouragement this book would not have been possible.
Chief among them are Peter Deutsch, Dave Ditzel, Jon Kannegaard, Wayne Rosing,
Eric Schmidt, Bob Sproull, Bert Sutherland, Ivan Sutherland, and the members of
Preface                                                                         xxix


the Programming Languages departments, particularly Sharokh Mortazavi, Peter
Damron, and Vinod Grover. I particularly thank Wayne Rosing for the faith to fund
my time working on the book for its first one and a half years.
     Second, I would like to thank the reviewers, all of whom have provided
valuable comments on drafts of the book, namely, J. Randy Allen, Bill Appelbe,
Preston Briggs, Fabian E. Bustamante, Siddhartha Chatterjee, Bob Colwell,
Subhendu Raja Das, Amer Diwan, Krishna Kunchithapadam, Jim Larus, Ion
Mandoiu, Allan Porterfield, Arch Robison, Francisco J. Torres-Rojas, and Michael
Wolfe.
     I am also indebted to colleagues in other companies and organizations who
have shared information about their compilers and other technical topics, whether
they appear directly in the book or not, namely, Michael Tiemann, James Wilson,
and Torbjorn Granlund of Cygnus Support; Richard Grove, Neil Faiman, Maurice
Marks, and Anton Chernoff of Digital Equipment; Craig Franklin of Green Hills
Software; Keith Keilman, Michael Mahon, James Miller, and Carol Thompson of
Hewlett-Packard; Robert Colwell, Suresh Rao, William Savage, and Kevin J. Smith
of Intel; Bill Hay, Kevin O ’Brien, and F. Kenneth Zadeck of International Business
Machines; Fred Chow, John Mashey, and Alex Wu of MIPS Technologies; Andrew
Johnson of the Open Software Foundation; Keith Cooper and his colleagues at Rice
University; John Hennessy, Monica Lam, and their colleagues at Stanford University;
and Nic Peeling of the UK Defense Research Agency.
     I am particularly indebted to my parents, Samuel and Dorothy Muchnick, who
created a homelife for me that was filled with possibilities, that encouraged me to
ask and to try to answer hard questions, and that stimulated an appreciation for the
beauty to be found in both the gifts of simplicity and in complexity, be it natural or
made by the hand of man.
     The staff at Morgan Kaufmann have shepherded this project through the stages
of the publishing process with skill and aplomb. They include Bruce Spatz, Doug
Sery, Jennifer Mann, Denise Penrose, Yonie Overton, Cheri Palmer, Jane Elliott, and
Lisa Schneider. I thank them all and look forward to working with them again.
     The compositor, Paul Anagnostopoulos of Windfall Software, designed the spe­
cial symbols used in ican and did a thorough and knowledgeable job of typesetting
the book. He made my day one morning when he sent me email saying that he looked
forward to reading the product of our joint labor.
     Last, but by no means least, I would like to thank my long-time lover, Eric
Milliren, for putting up with my spending so much time writing this book during
the last five years, for providing a nourishing home life for me, and for deferring
several of his own major projects until completion of the book was in sight.
                                                                           CHAPTER 1




                                         Introduction to
                                        Advanced Topics




      W
                   e begin by reviewing the structure of compilers and then proceed to lay
                   the groundwork for our exploration of the advanced topics in compiler
                   design and implementation discussed in the remainder of the book. In
                   particular, we first review the basics of compiler structure and then give an overv
                   of the advanced material about symbol-table structure and access, intermediate-c
                   forms, run-time representations, and automatic generation of code generators c
      tained in Chapters 3 through 6. Next we describe the importance of optimization
      to achieving fast code, possible structures for optimizing compilers, and the orga­
      nization of optimizations in an aggressive optimizing compiler. Then we discuss the
      reading flow relationships among the chapters. We conclude with a list of related
      topics not covered in this book, two short sections on target machines used in ex­
      amples and notations for numbers and the names we use for various data sizes, and
      a wrap-up of this chapter, followed by a Further Reading section and exercises, as
      will be found at the end of all but the last chapter.


1.1   Review o f Compiler Structure
      Strictly speaking, compilers are software systems that translate programs written in
      higher-level languages into equivalent programs in object code or machine language
      for execution on a computer. Thus, a particular compiler might run on an IBM-
      compatible personal computer and translate programs written in Fortran 77 into
      Intel 386-architecture object code to be run on a PC. The definition can be widened
      to include systems that translate from one higher-level language to another, from one
      machine language to another, from a higher-level language to an intermediate-level
      form, etc. With the wider definition, we might have, for example, a compiler that
      runs on an Apple Macintosh and translates Motorola M 68000 Macintosh object
      code to PowerPC object code to be run on a PowerPC-based Macintosh.

                                                                                           1
2              Introduction to Advanced T opics




    FIG. 1.1 High-level structure of a simple compiler.


                   A compiler, as narrowly defined, consists of a series of phases that sequentially
               analyze given forms of a program and synthesize new ones, beginning with the
               sequence of characters constituting a source program to be compiled and producing
               ultimately, in most cases, a relocatable object module that can be linked with others
               and loaded into a machine’s memory to be executed. As any basic text on compiler
               construction tells us, there are at least four phases in the compilation process, as
               shown in Figure 1.1, namely,
          1.   lexical analysis, which analyzes the character string presented to it and divides it up
               into tokens that are legal members of the vocabulary of the language in which the
               program is written (and may produce error messages if the character string is not
               parseable into a string of legal tokens);
          2.   syntactic analysis or parsing, which processes the sequence of tokens and produces
               an intermediate-level representation, such as a parse tree or a sequential intermediate
               code (for an example, see the definition of m ir in Section 4.6.1), and a symbol table
               that records the identifiers used in the program and their attributes (and may produce
               error messages if the token string contains syntax errors);
          3.   checking of the program for static-semantic validity (or semantic checking), which
               takes as input the intermediate code and symbol table and determines whether the
               program satisfies the static-semantic properties required by the source language,
               e.g., whether identifiers are consistently declared and used (and may produce error
               messages if the program is semantically inconsistent or fails in some other way to
               satisfy the requirements of the language’s definition); and
     Section 1.2      Advanced Issues in Elementary Topics                                              3


4.   code generation, which transforms the intermediate code into equivalent machine
     code in the form of a relocatable object module or directly runnable object code.

     Any detected errors may be warnings or definite errors and, in the latter case, may
     terminate compilation.
          In addition to the four phases, a compiler includes a symbol table and its access
     routines and an interface to the operating system and user environment (to read
     and write files, read user input, output messages to the user, etc.) that are available
     to all phases of the compilation process (as shown in Figure 1.1). The latter can
     be structured to allow the compiler to run under multiple operating systems without
     changing how it interfaces with them. The compiler structure diagrams from here on,
     except in Chapter 21, do not include the symbol table or operating-system interface.
          For many higher-level languages, the four phases can be combined into one pass
     over the source program to produce a fast, one-pass compiler. Such a compiler may
     be entirely appropriate for a casual user or as an alternative to incremental compi­
     lation in a software-development environment, where the goal is to provide quick
     turnaround for program changes in the edit-compile-debug cycle. It is generally not
     possible for such a compiler to produce very efficient code, however.
          Alternatively, the lexical and syntactic analysis phases can be combined into a
     pass that produces a symbol table and some form of intermediate code,1 and the
     semantic checking and generation of object code from the intermediate code may be
     done as a separate, second pass, or as two separate passes (or semantic checking may
     be done largely as part of the first pass). The object code produced by the compiler
     may be relocatable target-machine code or assembly language, which, in turn, needs
     to be processed by an assembler to produce relocatable object code. Once a program
     or its parts have been compiled, they generally need to be linked to interconnect them
     and any needed library routines, and read and relocated by a loader to produce a
     runnable image in memory. Linking may be done either before execution (statically)
     or during execution (dynamically), or may be split between the two, e.g., with the
     user’s program components linked statically and system libraries linked dynamically.



     Advanced Issues in Elementary Topics
     Here we provide an introduction to the advanced topics in symbol-table design and
     access, intermediate-code design, run-time representations, and automatic genera­
     tion of code generators discussed in Chapters 3 through 6. These are topics whose
     basic issues are generally among the major focuses of first courses in compiler design


     1. Some languages, such as Fortran, require that lexical and syntactic analysis be done cooperatively
     to correctly analyze programs. For example, given a line of Fortran code that begins “ do 32 i = 1”
     it is not possible to tell, without further lookahead, whether the characters before the equals sign
     make up three tokens or one. If the 1 is followed by a comma, there are three tokens before the
     equals sign and the statement begins a do loop, whereas if the line ends with the 1, there is one
     token before the equals sign, which may be equivalently written “ do32i” , and the statement is an
     assignment.
4   Introduction to Advanced Topics


    and development. However, they all have complexities that are introduced when one
    considers supporting a language whose flavor is not strictly vanilla.
         Design of symbol tables has been largely a matter more of occult arts than
    scientific principles. In part this is because the attributes of symbols vary from one
    language to another and because it is clear that the most important aspects of a
    global symbol table are its interface and its performance. There are several ways to
    organize a symbol table for speed depending on the choice of the underlying data
    structures, such as stacks, various sorts of trees, hash tables, and so on, each having
    strong points to recommend it. We discuss some of these possibilities in Chapter 3,
    but we primarily focus on a combination of stacks, hashing, and linked lists that
    deals with the requirements of languages such as Ada, Mesa, Modula-2, and C++ to
    be able to import and export scopes in ways that expand on the simple stack model
    of languages like Fortran, C, and Pascal.
         Intermediate-code design is also, to a significant degree, a matter of wizardry
    rather than science. It has been suggested that there are as many intermediate-
    language designs as there are different compiler suites— but this is probably off by
    a factor of two or so. In fact, given that many compilers use two or more distinct
    intermediate codes, there may be about twice as many intermediate-code designs as
    compiler suites!
         So Chapter 4 explores the issues encountered in designing intermediate codes
    and the advantages and disadvantages of various choices. In the interest of moving
    on to describe algorithms that operate on intermediate code, we must ultimately
    choose one or more of them as concrete examples. We choose four: hir , a high-level
    one that preserves loop structure and bounds and array subscripting for use in data-
    cache-related optimization; m ir , a medium-level one for most of the remainder of
    the book; lir , a low-level one for optimizations that must deal with aspects of real
    machines, with a subvariety that has symbolic, rather than real, machine registers for
    use in global register allocation; and SSA form, which can be thought of as a version
    of mir with an additional operation, namely, the 0-function, although we almost
    always use it in flowgraphs, rather than sequential programs. Figure 1.2 shows a
    hir loop, and a translation of it to m ir , and to lir with symbolic registers.
         Figure 1.3 shows the SSA form of the loop; its code is identical to that in Fig­
    ure 1.2(c), except that it has been turned into a flowgraph and the symbolic register
    s2 has been split into three—namely, s2 j, s 2 2 , and s2 $—and a 0-function has been
    added at the beginning of block B2 where s2\ and s 23 come together. SSA form has
    the major advantage of making several optimizations that previously worked on ba­
    sic blocks or extended basic blocks2 apply, as well, to whole procedures, often with
    significantly improved effectiveness.
         Another intermediate-code form, the program dependence graph, that is useful
    in performing several types of optimizations is discussed in Section 9.5.
         Chapter 5 focuses on issues of structuring the run-time environment in which
    programs execute. Along with code generation, it is one of the few things that are
    essential to get right if a language implementation is to be both correct and efficient.


    2. An extended basic block is a tree of basic blocks that can be entered only at its root and left only
    from a leaf.
           Section 1.2    Advanced Issues in Elementary Topics                                    5

           f o r v <- v l by v2 to v3 do
                a [ i ] <- 2
           endfor
           (a)

                v <- v l                         s2 <- s i
                t2 <- v2                         s4 <- s3
                t3 <- v3                         s6     s5
           L I: i f v > t3 goto L2         L I : i f s2 > s6 goto L2
                t4 <- addr a                     s7 <- addr a
                t5 <- 4 * i                      S8     4 * s9
                t6 <- t4 + t5                    slO      s7 + s8
                * t 6 <- 2                       [slO ] <- 2
                v <- v + t2                      s2 <- s2 + s4
                goto LI                          g oto LI
           L2:                             L2:
           (b)                             (c)
FIG, 1,2 A code fragment (assuming v2 is positive) in (a) hir , (b) mir , and (c) lir with symbolic
         registers.

           If the run-time model as designed doesn’t support some of the operations of the
           language, clearly one has failed in the design. If it works, but is slower than it needs
           to be, it will have a major impact on performance, and one that generally will not
           be fixable by optimizations. The essential issues are representation of source data
           types, allocation and use of registers, the run-time stack, access to nonlocal symbols,
           and procedure calling, entry, exit, and return. In addition, we cover extensions to
           the run-time model that are necessary to support position-independent code, and




FIG. 1.3 SSA form of the example in Figure 1.2. Note the splitting of s2 into three variables s2i,
         s 22, and s 23 , and the 0-function at the entry to block B2.
Introduction to Advanced Topics


their use in making possible and efficient the dynamic linking of shared code objects
at run time, and we provide an overview of the additional issues that must be
considered in compiling dynamic and polymorphic languages, such as incrementally
changing running code, heap storage management, and run-time type checking (and
its optimization or, where possible, elimination).
     Finally, Chapter 6 concerns methods for automatically generating code gener­
ators from machine descriptions. It describes one technique, namely, the syntax-
directed Graham-Glanville approach, in detail, and introduces two others, Gana-
pathi and Fischer’s semantics-directed parsing and Aho, Ganapathi, and Tjiang’s
twig, which uses tree pattern matching and dynamic programming. All of these ap­
proaches have the advantage over hand-generated code generators of allowing the
programmer to think at a higher level and to more easily modify a code generator
over time, either to fix it, to improve it, or to adapt it to a new target.


The Importance o f Code Optimization
Generally, the result of using a one-pass compiler structured as described in Sec­
tion 1.1 is object code that executes much less efficiently than it might if more
effort were expended in its compilation. For example, it might generate code on an
expression-by-expression basis, so that the C code fragment in Figure 1.4(a) might
result in the sparc assembly code3 in Figure 1.4(b), while it could be turned into the
much more efficient code in Figure 1.4(c) if the compiler optimized it, including allo­
cating the variables to registers. Even if the variables are not allocated to registers, at
least the redundant load of the value of c could be eliminated. In a typical early one-
scalar sparc implementation, the code in Figure 1.4(b) requires 10 cycles to execute,
while that in Figure 1.4(c) requires only two cycles.
     Among the most important optimizations, in general, are those that operate
on loops (such as moving loop-invariant computations out of them and simplify­
ing or eliminating computations on induction variables), global register allocation,
and instruction scheduling, all of which are discussed (along with many other opti­
mizations) in Chapters 12 through 20.
     However, there are many kinds of optimizations that may be relevant to a
particular program, and the ones that are vary according to the structure and details
of the program.
     A highly recursive program, for example, may benefit significantly from tail-call
optimization (see Section 15.1), which turns recursions into loops, and may only
then benefit from loop optimizations. On the other hand, a program with only a few
loops but with very large basic blocks within them may derive significant benefit
from loop distribution (which splits one loop into several, with each loop body
doing part of the work of the original one) or register allocation, but only modest
improvement from other loop optimizations. Similarly, procedure integration or
inlining, i.e., replacing subroutine calls with copies of their bodies, not only decreases
the overhead of calling them but also may enable any or all of the intraprocedural
optimizations to be applied to the result, with marked improvements that would

3. A guide to reading sparc assembly language can be found in Appendix A.
           Section 1.4      Structure of Optimizing Compilers                                               7


           in t a , b , c , d;        ldw      a ,r l            add     r l,r 2 ,r 3
           c = a + b;                 ldw      b ,r 2            add     r 3 ,l,r 4
           d = c + 1;                 add      r l,r 2 ,r 3
                                      stw      r 3 ,c
                                      ldw      c ,r 3
                                      add      r 3 ,l,r 4
                                      stw      r 4 ,d
           (a)                        (b)                        (c)
 FIG. 1.4 A C code fragment in (a) with naive sparc code generated for it in (b) and optimized
          code in (c).


           not have been possible without inlining or (the typically much more expensive)
           techniques of interprocedural analysis and optimization (see Chapter 19). On the
           other hand, inlining usually increases code size, and that may have negative effects
           on performance, e.g., by increasing cache misses. As a result, it is desirable to
           measure the effects of the provided optimization options in a compiler and to select
           the ones that provide the best performance for each program.
                These and other optimizations can make large differences in the performance
           of programs—frequently a factor of two or three and, occasionally, much more, in
           execution time.
                An important design principle for large software projects, including compilers, is
           to design and construct programs consisting of small, functionally distinct modules
           and make each module as simple as one reasonably can, so that it can be easily
           designed, coded, understood, and maintained. Thus, it is entirely possible that
           unoptimized compilation does very local code generation, producing code similar
           to that in Figure 1.4(b), and that optimization is necessary to produce the much
           faster code in Figure 1.4(c).


.4         Structure o f Optimizing Compilers
           A compiler designed to produce fast object code includes optimizer components.
           There are two main models for doing so, as shown in Figure 1.5(a) and (b).4 In
           Figure 1.5(a), the source code is translated to a low-level intermediate code, such
           as our lir (Section 4.6.3), and all optimization is done on that form of code; we
           call this the low-level model of optimization. In Figure 1.5(b), the source code is
           translated to a medium-level intermediate code, such as our mir (Section 4.6.1),
           and optimizations that are largely architecture-independent are done on it; then
           the code is translated to a low-level form and further optimizations that are mostly
           architecture-dependent are done on it; we call this the mixed model of optimization.
           In either model, the optimizer phase(s) analyze and transform the intermediate code
           to eliminate unused generality and to take advantage of faster ways to perform given
           tasks. For example, the optimizer might determine that a computation performed


           4. Again, lexical analysis, parsing, semantic analysis, and either translation or intermediate-code
           generation might be performed in a single step.
8              In troduction to A dvanced T o p ics



                                                                      String of characters




               (a)                                          (b)
    FIG. 1.5 Two high-level structures for an optimizing compiler: (a) the low-level model, with all
             optimization done on a low-level intermediate code, and (b) the mixed model, with
             optimization divided into two phases, one operating on each of a medium-level and a
             low-level intermediate code.

               in a loop produces the sam e result every time it is executed, so that moving the
               com putation out o f the loop w ould cause the program to execute faster. In the mixed
               m odel, the so-called postpass optim izer perform s low-level optim izations, such as
               taking advantage o f machine idioms and the target machine’s addressing modes,
               while this would be done by the unitary optimizer in the low-level model.
                   A mixed-model optim izer is likely to be more easily adapted to a new architec­
               ture and may be more efficient at com pilation time, while a low-level-model opti­
               mizer is less likely to be easily ported to another architecture, unless the second ar­
               chitecture resembles the first very closely— for exam ple, if it is an upward-compatible
Section 1.4    Structure of Optimizing Compilers                                      9


extension of the first. The choice between the mixed and low-level models is largely
one of investment and development focus.
     The mixed model is used in Sun Microsystems’ compilers for sparc (see Sec­
tion 21.1), Digital Equipment Corporation’s compilers for Alpha (see Section 21.3),
Intel’s compilers for the 386 architecture family (see Section 21.4), and Silicon Graph­
ics’ compilers for m ips . The low-level model is used in IBM’s compilers for power
and PowerPC (see Section 21.2) and Hewlett-Packard’s compilers for pa-r isc .
     The low-level model has the advantage of making it easier to avoid phase­
ordering problems in optimization and exposes all address computations to the
entire optimizer. For these and other reasons, we recommend using the low-level
model in building an optimizer from scratch, unless there are strong expectations
that it will be ported to a significantly different architecture later. Nevertheless, in
the text we describe optimizations that might be done on either medium- or low-
level code as being done on medium-level code. They can easily be adapted to work
on low-level code.
     As mentioned above, Sun’s and Hewlett-Packard’s compilers, for example, rep­
resent contrasting approaches in this regard. The Sun global optimizer was originally
written for the Fortran 77 compiler for the Motorola MC68010-based Sun-2 series
of workstations and was then adapted to the other compilers that shared a com­
mon intermediate representation, with the certain knowledge that it would need to
be ported to future architectures. It was then ported to the very similar MC68020-
based Sun-3 series, and more recently to sparc and sparc -V9. While considerable
investment has been devoted to making the optimizer very effective for sparc in par­
ticular, by migrating some optimizer components from before code generation to
after it, much of it remains comparatively easy to port to a new architecture.
     The Hewlett-Packard global optimizer for pa-risc , on the other hand, was
designed as part of a major investment to unify most of the company’s computer
products around a single new architecture. The benefits of having a single optimizer
and the unification effort amply justified designing a global optimizer specifically
tailored to pa-risc .
     Unless an architecture is intended only for very special uses, e.g., as an embedded
processor, it is insufficient to support only a single programming language for it. This
makes it desirable to share as many of the compiler components for an architecture
as possible, both to reduce the effort of writing and maintaining them and to derive
the widest benefit from one’s efforts at improving the performance of compiled
code. Whether the mixed or the low-level model of optimization is used makes no
difference in this instance. Thus, all the real compilers we discuss in Chapter 21
are members of compiler suites for a particular architecture that share multiple
components, including code generators, optimizers, assemblers, and possibly other
components, but that have distinct front ends to deal with the lexical, syntactic, and
static-semantic differences among the supported languages.
     In other cases, compilers for the same language are provided by a software
vendor for multiple architectures. Here we can expect to see the same front end
used, and usually the same optimizer components, but different cqde generators
and possibly additional optimizer phases to deal with the particular features of each
architecture. The mixed model of optimization is the more appropriate one in this
case. Often the code generators are structured identically, independent of the target
10              Introduction to Advanced Topics


                machine, in a way appropriate either to the source language or, more frequently, the
                common intermediate code, and differ only in the instructions generated for each
                target.
                      Yet another option is the use of a preprocessor to transform programs in one
                language into equivalent programs in another language and to compile them from
                there. This is how the early implementations of C++ worked, using a program named
                c fr o n t to translate C++ code to C code, performing, in the process (among other
                things), what has come to be known as name mangling— the transformation of
                readable C++ identifiers into virtually unreadable— but compilable— C identifiers.
                Another example of this is the use of a preprocessor to transform Fortran programs
                to ones that can take better advantage of vector or multiprocessing systems. A third
                example is to translate object code for an as-yet-unbuilt processor into code for an
                existing machine so as to emulate the prospective one.
                      One issue we have ignored so far in our discussion of optimizer structure and
                its place in a compiler or compiler suite is that some optimizations, particularly the
                data-cache-related ones discussed in Section 20.4, are usually most effective when
                applied to a source-language or high-level intermediate form, such as our hir (Sec­
                tion 4.6.2). This can be done as the first step in the optimization process, as shown
                in Figure 1.6, where the final arrow goes to the translator in the low-level model and




     FIG. 1.6 Adding data-cache optimization to an optimizing compiler. The continuation is to
              either the translator in the low-level model in Figure 1.5(a) or to the intermediate-code
              generator in the mixed model in Figure 1.5(b).
            Section 1.5    Placement of Optimizations in Aggressive Optimizing Compilers           11

            to the intermediate-code generator in the mixed model. An alternative approach,
            used in the IBM compilers for power and PowerPC, first translates to a low-level
            code (called XIL) and then generates a high-level representation (called YIL) from it
            to do data-cache optimization. Following the data-cache optimization, the resulting
            YIL code is converted back to XIL.


1.5         Placement o f Optimizations in Aggressive
            Optimizing Compilers
            In the last section we discussed the placement of optimizations in the overall com­
            pilation process. In what follows, the wrap-up section of each chapter devoted to
            optimization includes a diagram like the one in Figure 1.7 that specifies a reason­
            able sequence for performing almost all the optimizations discussed in the text in an
            aggressive optimizing compiler. Note that we say “ aggressive” because we assume
            that the goal is to improve performance as much as is reasonably possible without
            compromising correctness. In each of those chapters, the optimizations discussed
            there are highlighted by being in bold type. Note that the diagram includes only
            optimizations, not the other phases of compilation.
                 The letters at the left in Figure 1.7 specify the type of code that the optimizations
            to its right are usually applied to, as follows:
       A    These optimizations are typically applied either to source code or to a high-level
            intermediate code that preserves loop structure and sequencing and array accesses
            in essentially their source-code form. Usually, in a compiler that performs these
            optimizations, they are done very early in the compiling process, since the overall
            process tends to lower the level of the code as we move along from one pass to the
            next.
      B,C   These optimizations are typically performed on medium- or low-level intermediate
            code, depending on whether the mixed or low-level model is used.
       D    These optimizations are almost always done on a low-level form of code—one that
            may be quite machine-dependent (e.g., a structured assembly language) or that may
            be somewhat more general, such as our lir —because they require that addresses
            have been turned into base register + offset form (or something similar, depending
            on the addressing modes available on the target processor) and because several of
            them require low-level control-flow code.
        E   These optimizations are performed at link time, so they operate on relocatable object
            code. One interesting project in this area is Srivastava and Wall’s OM system, which
            is a pilot study for a compiler system that does all optimization at link time.
                The boxes in Figure 1.7, in addition to corresponding to the levels of code ap­
            propriate for the corresponding optimizations, represent the gross-level flow among
            the optimizations. For example, constant folding and algebraic simplifications are in
            a box connected to other phases by dotted arrows because they are best structured
            as subroutines that can be invoked anywhere they are needed.
12             In tr o d u c tio n to A d v an c e d T o p ic s




     FIG. 1.7 Order of optimizations.

                    The branches from C l to either C2 or C3 represent a choice of the methods one
               uses to perform essentially the same optimization (namely, moving computations to
               places where they are computed less frequently without changing the semantics of
               the program). They also represent a choice of the data-flow analyses used to perform
               the optimizations.
                    The detailed flow within the boxes is much freer than between the boxes. For
               example, in box B, doing scalar replacement of aggregates after sparse conditional
               constant propagation may allow one to determine that the scalar replacement is
               worthwhile, while doing it before constant propagation may make the latter more
               effective. An example of the former is shown in Figure 1.8(a), and of the latter in
           Section 1.5   Placement of Optimizations in Aggressive Optimizing Compilers           13

                                                             (to constant folding, algebraic
                                                           simplifications, and reassociation)
                                                                           A




           D




           E


FIG. 1.7 (continued)


           Figure 1.8(b). In (a), upon propagating the value 1 assigned to a to the test a = 1,
           we determine that the Y branch from block B1 is taken, so scalar replacement of
           aggregates causes the second pass of constant propagation to determine that the Y
           branch from block B4 is also taken. In (b), scalar replacement of aggregates allows
           sparse conditional constant propagation to determine that the Y exit from B1 is
           taken.
                Similarly, one ordering of global value numbering, global and local copy prop­
           agation, and sparse conditional constant propagation may work better for some
           programs and another ordering for others.
                Further study of Figure 1.7 shows that we recommend doing both sparse con­
           ditional constant propagation and dead-code elimination three times each, and in­
           struction scheduling twice. The reasons are somewhat different in each case:
      1.   Sparse conditional constant propagation discovers operands whose values are con­
           stant each time such an operand is used— doing it before interprocedural constant
           propagation helps to transmit constant-valued arguments into and through proce­
           dures, and interprocedural constants can help to discover more intraprocedural ones.
     2.    We recommend doing dead-code elimination repeatedly because several optimiza­
           tions and groups of optimizations typically create dead code and eliminating it as
           soon as reasonably possible or appropriate reduces the amount of code that other
14              Introduction to Advanced Topics




                (a)                                         (b)
     FIG. 1.8 Examples of (a) the effect of doing scalar replacement of aggregates after constant
              propagation, and (b) before constant propagation.


                compiler phases— be they optimizations or other tasks, such as lowering the level of
                the code from one form to another—have to process.
           3.   Instruction scheduling is recommended to be performed both before and after regis­
                ter allocation because the first pass takes advantage of the relative freedom of code
                with many symbolic registers, rather than few real registers, while the second pass
                includes any register spills and restores that may have been inserted by register allo­
                cation.

                    Finally, we must emphasize that implementing the full list of optimizations in
                the diagram results in a compiler that is both very aggressive at producing high-
                performance code for a single-processor system and that is quite large, but does not
                deal at all with issues such as code reorganization for parallel and vector machines.



1.6             Reading Flow Among the Chapters
                There are several approaches one might take to reading this book, depending on
                your background, needs, and several other factors. Figure 1.9 shows some possible
                paths through the text, which we discuss below.1

           1.   First, we suggest you read this chapter (as you’re presumably already doing) and
                Chapter 2. They provide the introduction to the rest of the book and the definition
                of the language ican in which all algorithms in the book are written.
           2.   If you intend to read the whole book, we suggest reading the remaining chapters in
                order. While other orders are possible, this is the order the chapters were designed
                to be read.
           Section 1.6   Reading Flow Among the Chapters                                     15




FIG. 1.9 Reading flow among the chapters in this book.


      3.   If you need more information on advanced aspects of the basics of compiler design
           and implementation, but may skip some of the other areas, we suggest you continue
           with Chapters 3 through 6.456
      4.   If your primary concern is optimization, are you interested in data-related optimiza­
           tion for the memory hierarchy, as well as other kinds of optimization?
            (a) If yes, then continue with Chapters 7 through 10, followed by Chapters 11
                through 18 and 20.
           (b) If not, then continue with Chapters 7 through 10, followed by Chapters 11
                through 18.
      5.   If you are interested in interprocedural optimization, read Chapter 19, which covers
           interprocedural control-flow, data-flow, alias, and constant-propagation analyses,
           and several forms of interprocedural optimization, most notably interprocedural
           register allocation.
      6.   Then read Chapter 21, which provides descriptions of four production compiler
           suites from Digital Equipment Corporation, IBM, Intel, and Sun Microsystems
           and includes examples of other intermediate-code designs, choices and orders of
     Introduction to Advanced Topics


     optimizations to perform, and techniques for performing optimizations and some
     of the other tasks that are parts of the compilation process. You may also wish to
     refer to the examples in Chapter 21 as you read the other chapters.
          The three appendixes contain supporting material on the assembly languages
     used in the text, concrete representations of data structures, and access to resources
     for compiler projects via f t p and the World Wide Web.


     Related Topics Not Covered in This Text
     There is a series of other topics we might have covered in the text, but which we
     omit for a variety of reasons, such as not expanding the book beyond its already
     considerable size, having only tangential relationships to the primary subject matter,
     or being covered well in other texts. (In Section 1.11 we provide references that the
     reader can use as entry points to material on these areas.) These include, among
     other areas, the following:
1.   The interaction o f optimization and debugging is an area that has been under
     investigation since about 1980. Progress has been relatively slow, but there is an
     impressive body of work by now. The work of Adl-Tabatabai and Gross and of
     Wismiiller provides excellent entry points into the literature.
2.   Parallelization and vectorization and their relationship to scalar optimization are not
     covered because they would require a lot more space and because there are already
     several good texts on parallelization and vectorization, for example, those by Wolfe,
     Banerjee, and Zima and Chapman. However, the technique of dependence analysis
     covered in Chapter 9 and the loop transformations discussed in Section 20.4.2 are
     fundamental to parallelization and vectorization.
3.   Profiling feedback to the compilation process is important and is referred to several
     times in the remainder of the book. A good introduction to the techniques, interpre­
     tation of their results, and their application in compilers can be found in the work
     of Ball and Larus and of Wall, along with references to previous work.


     Target Machines Used in Examples
     Most of our examples of target-machine code are in sparc assembly language. We
     use a simplified version that does not have register windows. Occasionally there are
     examples for sparc-V9 or in other assembly languages, such as for power or the
     Intel 386 architecture family. In all cases, the assembly languages are described well
     enough in Appendix A to enable one to read the examples.


     Number Notations and Data Sizes
     The terms byte and word are usually reserved for the natural sizes of a character
     and a register datum on a particular system. Since we are concerned primarily with
     32-bit systems with 8-bit bytes and with 64-bit systems designed as extensions of
             Section 1.10    Wrap-Up                                                             17


TABLE 1.1 Sizes of data types.

             Term            Size (bits)

             Byte                8
             Halfword         16
             Word             32
             Doubleword       64
             Quadword        128




             32-bit systems, we use these and other terms for storage sizes uniformly as shown in
             Table 1.1.
                  Almost all the numbers in this book are in decimal notation and are written in
             the ordinary way. We occasionally use hexadecimal notation, however. An integer
             represented in hexadecimal is written as “ Ox” followed by a string of hexadecimal
             digits (namely, 0-9 and either a - f or A-F) and is always to be interpreted as an
             unsigned number (unless it is specifically indicated to represent a signed value) of
             length equal to the number of the leftmost one bit counting the rightmost as number
             one. For example, 0x3a is a 6-bit representation of the number 58 and Oxf f f f f f f e
             is a 32-bit representation of the number 4294967294 = 232 - 2.



1.10         Wrap-Up
             In this chapter we have concentrated on reviewing some of the basic aspects of
             compilers and on providing a setting for launching into the chapters that follow.
                 After discussing what to expect in Chapters 3 through 6, which concern ad­
             vanced aspects of what are generally considered elementary topics, we next described
             the importance of optimization; structures for optimizing compilers, including the
             mixed and low-level models; and the organization of optimizations in an aggressive
             optimizing compiler.
                 Next we discussed possible orderings for reading the remaining chapters, and
             concluded with a list of related topics not covered here, and short sections on target
             machines used in examples and on notations for numbers and the names we use for
             various data sizes.
                 The primary lessons to take away from this chapter are five in number, namely,1

        1.   that there are advanced issues in what are usually considered elementary topics in
             compiler construction, such as dealing with imported and exported scopes, design or
             selection of intermediate languages, and position-independent code and shared code
             objects, that need to be taken into consideration in designing and building real-world
             compilers;
        2.   that there are several reasonable ways to organize both a compiler as a whole and
             the optimization components within it;
18                 Introduction to Advanced Topics


             3.    that there are two primary models (mixed and low-level) for dividing up the opti­
                   mization process, that the low-level model is generally preferable, but that the one to
                   choose varies with the circumstances of a particular compiler/optimization project;
             4.    that there are new optimizations and improved methods of performing traditional
                   ones being developed continually; and
             5.    that there are important topics, such as debugging of optimized code and the inte­
                   gration of scalar optimization with parallelization and vectorization, that deserve
                   careful study but are beyond the scope of this book.


1.11               Further Reading
                   Unlike the history of programming languages, for which there are two excellent
                   books available, namely, [Wexe81] and [BerG95], there is very little published ma­
                   terial on the history of compilers. A history of the very earliest stages of compiler
                   development is given in Knuth [Knut62]; some more recent material is included in
                   the two volumes noted above, i.e., [Wexe81] and [BerG95].
                        Among the better recent introductory texts on compiler construction are
                   [AhoS86] and [FisL91].
                        Name mangling, as used in the encoding of C++ programs as C programs, is
                   described as the “ function name encoding scheme” in [Stro88].
                        [GhoM86] describes the origins, structure, and function of the Sun global op­
                   timizer, and [JohM86] describes the structure and performance of the Hewlett-
                   Packard global optimizer for pa-r isc .
                        Srivastava and Wall’s OM system is described in [SriW93].
                        A starting reference to Adl-Tabatabai and Gross’s work on optimization and
                   debugging is [AdlG93]. Wismiiller’s [Wism94] is a reference to another thread of
                   work in this area.
                        The texts available on compiling for parallel systems are [Bane88], [Bane93],
                   [Bane94], [Wolf96], and [ZimC91].
                        The work of Ball and Larus on profiling is covered in [BalL92]. Wall’s work
                   in [Wall91] concerns the effect of feedback from profiling on recompilation and the
                   resulting performance effects.


1.12               Exercises
            i .i   Determine and describe the large-scale structure and intermediate codes of a com­
                   piler in use in your computing environment. What sections of the compiler are
                   optionally executed under user control?
     RSCH 1.2 Pick a paper from among [GhoM86], [JohM86], [SriW93], [AdlG93], [Wism94],
              [BalL92], and [Wall91] and write a three- to five-page synopsis of the issues or
              problems it concerns, the findings or conclusions, and the support for them offered
              in the paper.
                                                                              CHAPTER 2



                Informal Compiler
        Algorithm Notation (ICAN)




      I
           n this chapter we discuss ican , the Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation we
           use in this text to express compiler algorithms. First we discuss the extended
           Backus-Naur form that is used to express the syntax of both ican and the
           intermediate languages discussed in the following chapter. Next we provide an in­
      troduction to the language and its relationship to common programming languages,
      an informal overview of the language, and then a formal description of the syntax
      of ican and an informal English description of its semantics. It is hoped that, in
      general, the informal overview will be sufficient for the reader to understand ican
      programs, but the full definition is provided to deal with those instances where it is
      not.


2.1   Extended Backus-Naur Form Syntax Notation
      To describe the syntax of programming languages we use a version of Backus-Naur
      Form that we call Extended Backus-Naur Form, or x b n f . In xbnf terminals are
      written in ty p ew riter fon t (e.g., “ ty p e ” and “ [” ), nonterminals are written in
      italic font with initial capital letters and other uppercase letters interspersed for read­
      ability (e.g., “ ProgUnit”, not “ Progunit” ). A production consists of a nonterminal
      followed by a long right arrow (“ — ► ” ) and a sequence of nonterminals, terminals,
      and operators. The symbol “ e ” represents the empty string of characters.
            The operators are listed in Table 2.1. The operators superscript          superscript
      “ + ” , and “ x ” all have higher precedence than concatenation, which has higher
      precedence than alternation “ |” . The curly braces “ {” . . . “ }” and square brackets
      “ [” . . . “ ]” act as grouping operators, in addition to brackets indicating that what
      they contain is optional. Note that the xbnf operators are written in our ordinary
      text font. When the same symbols appear in ty p e w riter fo n t, they are terminal
      symbols in the language being defined. Thus, for example,

                                                                                              19
20           Informal Compiler Algorithm N otation (ICAN)


 TABLE 2.1 Operators used in Extended Backus-Naur Form syntax descriptions.

             Symbol                     Meaning

             1                          Separates alternatives
             { and }                    Grouping
             [ and ]                    Optional
             *                          Zero or more repetitions
             +                          One or more repetitions
             X                          One or more repetitions of the left operand
                                           separated by occurrences of the right operand


                  Knittinglnst — > {{kn it | p u rl} Integer | c a s t o f f } +

             describes a Knittinglnst as a sequence of one or more of any of three possibilities,
             namely, k n it followed by an integer, p u rl followed by an integer, or c a s t o f f; and

                  Wall — > b ric k x mortar | cementblock x mortar

             describes a Wall as a sequence of b rick s separated (or, perhaps more appropriately,
             joined) by occurrences of mortar or as a sequence of cementblocks separated by
             occurrences of mortar.
                 As a more relevant example, consider
                  ArrayTypeExpr            —>          a rray [ ArrayBounds ] of TypeExpr
                  ArrayBounds              —>          {[Expr\ •• [Expr]} tx ,
             The first line describes an ArrayTypeExpr as the keyword array , followed by a left
             bracket “ [” , followed by an occurrence of something that conforms to the syntax
             of ArrayBounds, followed by a right bracket “ ] ” , followed by the keyword of,
             followed by an occurrence of something conforming to the syntax of TypeExpr. The
             second line describes ArrayBounds as a series of one or more triples of the form of
             an optional Expr, followed by “ • • ” , followed by an optional Expr, with the triples
             separated by com m as", ” . The following are examples of ArrayTypeExprs:

                  arra y   [ • • ] of in te g e r
                  arra y   [1•* 10] of r e a l
                  arra y   [ l - * 2 , l * - 2 ] of r e a l
                  arra y   [m**n+2] of boolean


2.2          Introduction to ICAN
             Algorithms in this text are written in a relatively transparent, informal notation1
             called ican (Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation) that derives features from


             1. One measure of the informality of ican is that many facets of the language that are considered
             to be errors, such as accessing an array with an out-of-range subscript, have their effects undefined.
           Section 2.2    Introduction to ICA N                                                  21


            1      Struc: Node — > set of Node
            2
            3      procedure Example.1(N,r)
            4         N: in set of Node
            5         r: in Node
            6      begin
            7         change :* true: boolean
            8         D, t: set of Node
            9         n, p: Node
           10          Struc(r) := {r>
           11         for each n e N (n * r) do
           12             Struc(n) :* N
           13          od
           14         while change do
           15             change :* false
           16             for each n e N - {r> do
           17                t :« N
           18                for each p e Pred[n] do
           19                   t n= Struc(p)
           20                od
           21                D := {n} u t
           22                if D *Struc(n) then
           23                   change := true; Struc(n) := D
           24                fi
           25             od
           26          od
           27      end     II Example.1

FIG. 2.1   A sample ican global declaration and procedure (the line numbers at left are not part of
           the code).


           several programming languages, such as C, Pascal, and Modula-2, and that ex­
           tends them with natural notations for objects such as sets, tuples, sequences, func­
           tions, arrays, and compiler-specific types. Figures 2.1 and 2.2 give examples of i c a n
           code.
                The syntax of i c a n is designed so that every variety of compound statement
           includes an ending delimiter, such as “ f i ” to end an if statement. As a result, sep­
           arators are not needed between statements. However, as a convention to improve
           readability, when two or more statements are written on the same line we separate
           them with semicolons (Figure 2.1, line 23). Similarly, if a definition, declaration,
           or statement extends beyond a single line, the continuation lines are indented (Fig­
           ure 2.2, lines 1 and 2 and lines 4 and 5).
                A comment begins with the delimiter “ I I” and runs to the end of the line
           (Figure 2.1, line 27).
                Lexically, an i c a n program is a sequence of a s c i i characters. Tabs, comments,
           line ends, and sequences of one or more spaces are called “whitespace.” Each
           occurrence of whitespace may be turned into a single space without affecting the
           meaning of a program. Keywords are preceded and followed by whitespace, but
           operators need not be.
22              In form al C o m p ile r A lgorith m N o ta tio n (IC A N )


                 1      webrecord = record {defs: set of Def,
                 2                          uses: set of Use}
                 3
                 4     procedure Example_2(nwebs,Symreg,nregs,
                 5        Edges) returns boolean
                 6        nwebs: inout integer
                 7        nregs: in integer
                 8        Symreg: out array [1••nwebs] of webrecord
                 9        Edges: out set of (integer x integer)
                10     begin
                11         si, s2, rl, r2: integer
                12         for rl := 1 to nregs (odd(rl)) do
                13            Symreg[nwebs+rl] := nil
                14         od
                15         Edges := 0
                16         for rl := 1 to nregs do
                17            for r2 := 1 to nregs do
                18               if rl * r2 then
                19                   Edges u= {<nwebs+rl,nwebs+r2>}
                20               fi
                21            od
                22         od
                23         for si := 1 to nwebs do
                24            repeat
                25               case si of
                26     1:            s2 := si * nregs
                27     2:            s2 := si - 1
                28     3:            s2 := nregs - nwebs
                29                   return false
                30     default:      s2 := 0
                31               esac
                32            until s2 = 0
                33            for r2 := 1 to nregs do
                34               if Interfere(Symreg[si],r2) then
                35                   goto LI
                36               fi
                37            od
                38   LI: od
                39        nwebs += nregs
                40         return true
                41     end     II Example_2

     FIG. 2.2 A second example of ican code (the line numbers at left are not part of the code).

                    Lexical analysis proceeds left to right, and characters are accumulated to form
                tokens that are as long as they can be. Thus, for example, the code
                     f o r I3 7 _ 6 a := - 1 2 by 1 t o n l7 a do

                consists of nine tokens, as follows:
                     fo r    I3 7 _ 6 a   :=   -1 2    by    1    to    n l7 a   do
Section 2.3    A Quick Overview of ICAN                                                 23


A Quick Overview o f ICAN
In this section we give a quick overview of ican , which should be sufficient for
the reader to begin reading and understanding program s in the text. The following
sections define the syntax of the language formally and the semantics informally.
     An ican program consists of a series of type definitions, followed by a series of
variable declarations, followed by a series of procedure declarations, followed by an
optional main program.
     A type definition consists of a type name followed by an equals sign and a type
expression, such as

    intset = set of integer

Types may be either generic or compiler-specific, and either simple or constructed.
The generic simple types are boolean, in te g e r , r e a l , and c h a ra c te r. The type
constructors are listed in the following table:

    Constructor        Nam e             Exam ple Declaration

    enum               Enumeration       enum {left,right}
    array ... of       Array             array [1 ••10] of integer
    set of             Set               set of MIRInst
    sequence of        Sequence          sequence of boolean
    x                  Tuple             integer x set of real
    record             Record            record {x: real, y: real}
    u                  Union             integer u boolean
                       Function          integer — > set of real

    A variable declaration consists of the name of the variable, followed by an
optional initialization, followed by a colon and the variable’s type, e.g.,

    is := {1,3,7}: intset

     A procedure declaration consists of the procedure’s name, followed by its
parameter list in parentheses, followed by an optional return type, followed by its
parameter declarations and its body. A parameter declaration consists of a comma-
separated sequence of variable names; followed by a colon; one of in (call by value),
out (call by result), or in o u t (call by value-result); and the type of the param ­
eters. A procedure body consists of the keyword b eg in , followed by a series of
variable declarations, followed by a series of statements, followed by the keyword
end. For example, Figures 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3 all give examples of procedure declara­
tions.
     An expression is either a constant, a variable, n i l , a unary operator followed
by an expression, two expressions separated by a binary operator, a parenthesized
expression, an array expression, a sequence expression, a set expression, a tuple
expression, a record expression, a procedure or function call, an array element,
a tuple element, a record field, a size expression, or a quantified expression. The
operands and operators must be of compatible types.
24              Inform al Com piler Algorithm N otation (ICAN)


                procedure exam(x,y,is) returns boolean
                   x, y: out integer
                    is: in intset
                begin
                   tv := true: boolean
                   z: integer
                   for each z e is (z > 0) do
                       if x = z then
                          return tv
                       fi
                   od
                   return y e is
                end     I| exam

     FIG. 2.3   An example ican procedure declaration.



                    The operators appropriate to specific types may be found in Section 2.7. A few of
                the less obvious ones are discussed below. The following are examples of constants
                of constructed types:

                    Type______________________              Exam ple Constant

                    array [1•* 2,1••2] of real              [[1.0,2.0],[3.0,4.0]]
                    sequence of integer                     [2,3,5,7,9,11]

                                                            {< , . ),< , . »
                    integer x boolean                       <3,true)
                    set of (integer x real)                   3 3 0   2 2 0
                    record {x: real, y: real}               <x:1.0,y:-1.0>
                    (integer x real) — > boolean            {<1,2.0,true),<1,3.0,false)}

                      The in t e g e r and r e a l types include 00 and     The empty set is denoted 0 and
                the empty sequence []. The value n i l is a member of every type and is the value of
                any uninitialized variable. The expression \x \ produces the size of x if x is a member
                of any constructed type— cardinality for sets, length for sequences, etc.
                      The unary operator            when applied to a set yields an arbitrary member of the
                set. The expression sq i i yields the /th member of the sequence sq, sq 1 © s q l yields
                the concatenation of sq l and s q l, and sq © i yields sq with the /th element removed;
                if i is negative, it counts backward from the end of sq. The expression tpl @ i yields
                the /th element of tuple tpl.
                      Compiler-specific types are defined as needed. For example,

                    Block = array [••] of array [••] of MIRInst
                    Edge = Node x Node

                    Statements include assignments, calls, returns, gotos, ifs, cases; and for, while,
                and repeat loops. The basic assignment operator is “      As in C, the colon may be
                replaced by any binary operator whose left-hand operand and result have the same
                type; for example, the following assignments both do the same thing:
            Section 2.5       Type Definitions                                                        25


                  Seq := Seq ® [9,11]
                  Seq ®= [9,11]

                Each compound statement has an ending delimiter. The beginning, internal, and
            ending delimiters of the compound statements are as follows:

                  Beginning       Internal                Ending

                  if              elif,else               fi
                  case            of, default             esac
                  for             do                      od
                  while           do                      od
                  repeat                                  until

            Case labels are also internal delimiters in case statements.
                All keywords used in the language are reserved—they may not be used as
            identifiers. They are listed in Table 2.8.
                The following sections describe ican in detail.



2.4         Whole Programs
            An ican program consists of a series of type definitions, followed by a series of
            variable declarations, followed by a series of procedure declarations, followed by an
            optional main program. The main program has the form of a procedure body. The
            syntax of ican programs is given in Table 2.2.


TABLE 2.2 Syntax of whole ican programs.

            P ro g ra m      —►     T y p e D e f* V arD e c l* P ro c D e c l* [ M a in P r o g ]
            M a in P r o g   —►     P ro c B o d y




2.5         Type Definitions
            A type definition consists of one or more pairs of a type name followed by an equals
            sign        followed by the definition (Figure 2.2, lines 1 and 2). The syntax of type
            definitions is given in Table 2.3. Type definitions may be recursive. The type defined
            by a recursive type definition is the smallest set that satisfies the definition, i.e., it is
            the least fixed point of the definition. For example, the type defined by

                  IntPair = integer u (IntPair x IntPair)

            is the set containing all integers and all pairs each of whose elements is either an
            integer or a pair of elements of the type.
26           Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


 TABLE 2.3   Syntax of ican type definitions.

             T y p eD ef                      {TypeN am e =}* TypeExpr
             TypeN am e                       Identifier
             TypeE xpr                        Sim pleT ypeE xpr \ C on strT ypeE xpr | ( TypeExpr )
                                               | TypeN am e | 0
             Sim pleT ypeExpr                 boolean |integer |real |character
             C on strT ypeE xpr               E n u m T ypeE xpr \ A rrayT ypeE xpr \ SetTypeExpr
                                              | Sequen ceT ypeExpr \ TupleT ypeExpr \ R ecordTypeExpr
                                              | U n ion TypeExpr \ EuncTypeExpr
             E n u m T ypeE xpr               enum { Identifier x , >
             A rrayT ypeE xpr                 array [ A rrayB oun ds ] of T ypeExpr
             A rray B ou nds                  {[E xpr] • • [E xpr]\ x ,
             SetT ypeE xpr                    set of TypeExpr
             Sequen ceT ypeExpr               sequence of TypeExpr
             Tu pleT ypeExpr                  T ypeE xpr x *
             R ecord T y peE xp r             record { {Identifier x , : TypeExpr] x , >
             U n ion TypeExpr                 T ypeE xpr x u
             Eun cTypeExpr                    T ypeE xpr x x — > TypeE xpr



2.6          Declarations
             The syntax of ican variable and procedure declarations is given in Table 2.4. The
             syntax includes the nonterminal C o n s t E x p r , which is not defined in the grammar. It
             denotes an expression none of whose components is a variable.
                  A variable declaration consists of the name of the identifier being declared
             followed by an optional initialization, followed by a colon and its type (Figure 2.1,
             lines 1, 4, 5, and 7 through 9). An array’s dimensions are part of its type and are
             specified by placing a list of the ranges of values of each of the subscripts in square


 TABLE 2.4   Syntax of ican declarations.

             VarDecl              —►   { Variable [: = C o n stE x p r] } x , : TypeExpr
             Variable             —>   Identifier
             P rocD ecl                procedure P rocN am e P aram L ist [returns TypeExpr]
                                       P aram D ecls P rocB ody
             P rocN am e          —>   Identifier
             P aram L ist         —>   ( [Param eter x ,] )
             Param eter           —►   Identifier
             P aram D ecls        —*   P aram D ecl*
             P aram D ecl         —>   Variable x , : (in |out | inout} T ypeExpr
             P rocB ody           —►   begin VarD ecl* Statem ent* end
            Section 2.7              Data Types and Expressions                                                                       27


            brackets after the keyword array (Figure 2.2, line 8). An initial value for an identifier
            is specified by following it with the assignment operator “ := ” and the value (which
            may be any expression constructed solely from constants, as long as it is of the
            right type) following the identifier (Figure 2.1, line 7). Several identifiers of the same
            type may be declared in a single declaration by separating their names and optional
            initializations with commas (Figure 2.1, lines 8 and 9).
                 A procedure is declared by the keyword procedure followed by its name, fol­
            lowed by a series of parameters in parentheses, followed by an optional return type,
            followed by a series of indented lines that declare the types of the parameters (Figure
            2.1, lines 4 and 5), followed by the procedure’s body (Figure 2.1, lines 6 through 27).
            The return type consists of the keyword retu rn s followed by a type expression (Fig­
            ure 2.2, line 5). Parameters are declared “ in ” (call by value), “ out” (call by result),
            or “ inout” (call by value-result) (see Figure 2.2, lines 6 through 9). A procedure’s
            text is indented between the keywords begin and end (Figure 2.1, lines 6 and 27).
                 A type definition or variable declaration may be made global to a group of
            procedures by placing it before their declarations (Figure 2.1, line 1 and Figure 2.2,
            lines 1 and 2).

2.7         Data Types and Expressions
            The syntax of ican expressions and generic simple constants are given in Tables 2.5
            and 2.6, respectively.

TABLE 2.5 Syntax of ican expressions.

            Expr                               V ariable \ S im p le C o n st | ( E x p r ) | U n ary O p e r E x p r
                                               | E x p r B in a ry O p e r E x p r \ A rray E x p r | S e q u e n c e E x p r
                                               | S e tE x p r \ T u p le E x p r \ R e c o rd E x p r \ P ro c F u n c E x p r
                                               | A r r a y E ltE x p r \ S iz e E x p r \ Q u a n tE x p r \ E x p r e Type E x p r
                                               |nil
            U n ary O p er                      ! 1- 1*
            B in ary O p e r                   = I* I&IV |+ |- | * |/ |% |t |< |< |> |> |u |n
                                               |G|*|x|©|i|e|@| .
            A rray E x p r                      [ E xp rx , ]
            S eq u e n c eE x p r               [ E x p r x , ] | " A S C I I C h a rac te r* "
            S e tE x p r                       0 |{ E x p r x , |[V ariab le e] E x p r where S e tD e fC la u se }
            Tuple E x p r                      < E xp rx , >
            R e c o rd E x p r                 < {Id en tifier : E x p r} x , >
            P ro c F u n c E x p r             P ro c N a m e A r g L ist
            A rg L ist                         ( [E x p r x ,] )
            A r ra y E ltE x p r               Expr [ Expr x           , ]
            Q u a n tE x p r                   {3 | V} V ariable e [E x p r \ T y p eE x p r] ( E x p r )
            S iz e E x p r                     1Expr I
            V ariable                          Iden tifier
28            Inform al Com piler Algorithm N otation (ICAN)


 TABLE 2.6 Syntax of ican constants of generic simple types.

              S im p le C o n s t         I n t C o n s t | R e a lC o n s t \ B o o l C o n s t \ C h a r C o n s t
              In tC o n st                0 | [-] N Z D i g i t D i g i t * | [-] 00
              N Z D ig it                 1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9
              D ig it                     0 | N Z D ig it
              R e a lC o n s t            [-] { I n t C o n s t . [I n t C o n s t] \ [I n t C o n s t] . I n t C o n s t }
                                          [E I n t C o n s t ] | [-] «>
              B o o lC o n st             tr u e | f a l s e
              C h arC o n st              ' A S C II C h a rac te r '
              I d e n tifie r             L e t t e r [ L e t t e r \ D ig it \ _ )*
              L e tte r                   a|...|z|A|...|Z


                  A type corresponds to the set of its members. It may be either simple or con­
              structed. Also, a type may be generic or compiler-specific.
                  The generic simple types are b oolean , in te g e r , r e a l , and c h a ra c te r.
                  A constructed type is defined by using one or more type constructors. The
              type constructors are enum, a r r a y . . . o f, s e t o f, sequence o f, re co rd , “ u” , “ x ” ,
              and “ —     The symbol “ u” constructs union types, “ x ” constructs tuple types, and
              “ —> ” constructs function types.
                  An expression is either a constant, a variable, n i l , a unary operator followed
              by an expression, two expressions separated by a binary operator, a parenthesized
              expression, an array expression, a sequence expression, a set expression, a tuple
              expression, a record expression, a procedure or function call, an array element, a
              quantified expression, or a size expression. The operands and operators must be of
              compatible types, as described below.

2.7.1         Generic Simple Types
              The Boolean values are tr u e and f a l s e . The following binary operators apply to
              Booleans:
                     Operation       Symbol

                     Equals
                     N ot equals     *
                     Logical and     &
                     Logical or      V
              The prefix unary operator negation “ ! ” applies to Booleans.
                   A quantified expression is Boolean-valued. It consists of the symbol “ 3” or
              “ V” followed by a variable, followed by “ e ” , followed by a type- or set-valued
              expression, followed by a parenthesized Boolean-valued expression. For example,
                     3v e Var (O p n d (in st, v ) )
              is a quantified expression that evaluates to tr u e if and only if there is some variable
              v such that O p n d (in st,v ) is tru e .
        Section 2.7     Data Types and Expressions                                               29


             An integer value is either 0, an optional minus sign followed by a series of one
        or more decimal digits the first of which is nonzero, °°, or -®.
             A real value is an integer followed by a period, followed by an integer (either
        but not both of the integers may be absent), followed by an optional exponent, °°, or
        -°°.2 An exponent is the letter “ E” followed by an integer.
             The following binary operators apply to finite integers and reals:
            Operation                        Symbol

            Plus                             +
            Minus                            -
            Times                            *
            Divide                           /
            Modulo                           °/o

            Exponentiation                   t
            Equals                           =
            Not equals                       *
            Less than                        <
            Less than or equal to            <
            Greater than                     >
            Greater than or equal to         >

        The prefix unary operator negation        applies to finite integers and reals. Only the
        relational operators apply to infinite values.
             A character value is an allowed ascii character enclosed in single quotation
        marks, e.g., 'a ' or ' G'. The allowed ascii characters (represented by the otherwise
        undefined nonterminal ASCIICharacter in the syntax) are all the printing ascii
        characters, space, tab, and carriage return. Several of the characters require escape
        sequences to represent them, as follows:
            Escape
            Sequence        Meaning
            %r             Carriage return
            y ii           it


            V
            n              y.
            The binary operators equals (“ = ” ) and not equals (“ * ” ) apply to characters.

2.7.2   Enumerated Types
        An enumerated type is a non-empty finite set of identifiers. A variable var is declared
        to be of an enumerated type by a declaration of the form
            var: enum { element\t                  elementny
        where each elementi is an identifier.

        2. ican real values are not floating-point numbers—they are mathematical real numbers.
30      Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


            The following example declares a c tio n to be a variable of an enumerated type:
            a c tio n : enum { S h i f t , Reduce, Accept, E rro r}
           The binary operators equals (“ = ” ) and not equals (“ * ” ) apply to members of an
        enumerated type.
           Elements of an enumerated type may appear as case labels (see Section 2.8.6).

2.7.3   Arrays
        A variable var is declared to be of an array type by a declaration of the form
            var: array [.subslist] of basetype
        where subslist is a comma-separated list of subscript ranges, each of which may be
        just “ • • ” , and basetype is the type of the array’s elements. For example, the code
        fragment
            U : array [5••8] of real
            V: array [1"2,1"3] of real


            U := [ 1 .0 ,0 .1 ,0 .0 1 ,0 .0 0 1 ]
            V := [ [ 1 . 0 , 2 . 0 , 3 . 0 ] , [ 4 .0 ,5 .0 ,6 .0 ] ]
        declares U to be a one-dimensional array whose subscript ranges over the integers
        5 through 8, and V to be a two-dimensional array whose first subscript ranges over
        the integers 1 through 2, whose second subscript ranges over the integers 1 through
        3, and both of whose elements are of type r e a l. It also assigns particular array
        constants to be their values.
              Of course, an array may be viewed as a finite function from the product of some
        number of copies of the integers to another type.
              A constant of a one-dimensional array type is a comma-separated series of con­
        stants of the element type, enclosed in square brackets, whose length is hi —lo + 1,
        where lo and hi are the minimal and maximal subscript values. A constant of an n-
        dimensional array type for n > 1 is a comma-separated series of constants in square
        brackets whose type is that of the (n —1)-dimensional array obtained by deleting the
        first subscript. The series is enclosed in square brackets and its length is hi —lo + 1,
        where lo and hi are the minimal and maximal values of the first subscript. Thus,
        arrays are represented in row-major order.
             The binary operators equals (“ = ” ) and not equals (“ * ” ) apply to whole arrays.
        An array-valued expression of dimension n followed by a comma-separated list of
        at most n subscript values enclosed in square brackets is an expression.
              Note that the two array types
            array [1••10,1••10] of integer
            array [1••10] of array [1••10] of integer
        are different, even though constants of the two types are indistinguishable. The
        first is a two-dimensional array, and the second is a one-dimensional array of one­
        dimensional arrays.
        Section 2.7     Data Types and Expressions                                                  31


2.7.4   Sets
        A variable var of a set type may have as its value any subset of its base type declared
        as follows:
            var: s e t of basetype
        where basetype is the type of the set’s elements.
            A set constant is either the empty set “ 0” , a comma-separated series of elements
        enclosed by left and right curly braces, or an intentionally defined set constant. The
        elements must all be of the same type. For example, the following are set constants:
            0   {1 }       { 1 ,2 ,1 0 0 } {< tru e ,1 . 0 ) , { f a l s e ,- 2 .3 )}
            {n e in te g e r where 0 £ n & n ^ 20 & n % 2 = 0 }
        Further, in the program fragment
            B: s e t of in te g e r
            B := { 1 ,4 ,9 ,1 6 }
            B := {n e in te g e r where 3m e in te g e r (1 < m & m < 4 & n = m * m ) }
        both assignments are valid, and both assign the same value to B.
            The following binary operators apply to sets:
            Operation               Symbol

            Union                   u
            Intersection            n
            Difference              -
            Product                 X

            Member of               €
            Not member of           *
        The last two of these, “ e ” and            take a value of a type ty as their left operand and
        a value of type “ s e t of ty” as their right operand, and produce a Boolean result. For
        “ e ” , the result is tru e if the left operand is a member of the right operand and f a l s e
        otherwise. For            the result is f a l s e if the left operand is a member of the right
        and tru e otherwise.
               The prefix unary operator                selects, at random, an element from its set
        operand, and the selected element is the result, e.g., ^ { 1 ,2 ,7 } may have any of 1, 2,
        or 7 as its value.
               Note that the binary operator “ e ” and the same symbol used in for-loop iterators
        are different. The former produces a Boolean value, while the latter is part of a larger
        expression that generates a sequence of values, as shown in Figure 2.4. The code in
        (a) is equivalent in meaning to that in (b), where Tmp is a new temporary of the same
        type as A.
               The otherwise undefined nonterminal SetDefClause in the syntax description is
        a clause that defines the members of a set intentionally, such as the text between
        where and “ } ” in the following code:
            S := {n e N where 3e e E (e@2 = n )}
32              Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


                                           Tmp := A
                for each a e A do          while Tmp * 0 do
                    body                      a := ♦Tmp
                od                            Tmp -= {a}
                                              body
                                           od
                (a)                         (b)
     FIG. 2.4 (a) An ican for loop that iterates over a set, and (b) equivalent code using a while loop.


                Note that a set definition containing a SetDefClause can always be replaced by a nest
                of loops, such as the following for the assignment above, assuming that the type of
                E is the product of the type of N with itself:
                      S := 0
                      fo r each n © N do
                           fo r each e © E do
                               i f e@2 = n then
                                   S u= { n>
                               fi
                           od
                      od


2.7.5           Sequences
                A variable var is declared to be of a sequence type by a declaration of the form
                      var: sequence of basetype
                where basetype is the element type of the sequences that may be var's value.
                     A constant of a sequence type is a finite comma-separated series of members
                of its base type enclosed in square brackets. The elements must all be of the same
                type. The empty sequence is denoted “ [ ] ” . For example, the following are sequence
                constants:
                      []      [1]      [1 ,2 ,1 ]     [tru e , f a l s e ]
                Sequence concatenation is represented by the binary operator “ ®” . The binary oper­
                ator “ 1” when applied to a sequence and a nonzero integer selects an element of the
                sequence; in particular, the positive integer n selects the « th element of the sequence,
                and the negative integer —n selects the « th element from the end of the sequence. For
                example, [ 2 ,3 ,5 ,7 ] 12 = 3 and [ 2 ,3 ,5 ,7 ] 1-2 = 5. The binary operator © when ap­
                plied to a sequence s and a nonzero integer n produces a copy of the sequence with
                the « th element removed. For example, [2 ,3 ,5 ,7 ]© 2 = [2 ,5 ,7 ] and [2 ,3 ,5 ,7 ]© -2
                = [ 2 ,3 ,7 ].
                     The type C harString is an abbreviation for sequence of ch aracter. For ex­
                ample, "ab CD" is identical to [ 'a ' , 'b ' , ' ' , 'C' , 'D ']. The empty C harString is
                denoted interchangeably by [ ] and by             and for any character x , [ ' * ' ] = "x".
        Section 2.7       Data Types and Expressions                                                 33


             Note that the array constants are a subset of the sequence constants—the only
        difference is that in an array constant, all members at each nesting level must have
        the same length.


2.7.6   Tuples
        A variable var is declared to be of a tuple type by a declaration of the form
            var: basetypex x . . . x basetypen

        where basetypej is the type of the /th component.
            A tuple constant is a fixed-length comma-separated series enclosed in angle
        brackets. As an example of a tuple type, consider
            in te g e r x in te g e r x boolean

        An element of this type is a triple whose first and second elements are integers
        and whose third element is a Boolean, such as < 1 ,7 ,tr u e ). The following are also
        examples of tuple constants:
            <1>       < 1 ,2 ,tr u e )   < t r u e ,f a l s e )
            The binary operator @ when applied to a tuple and a positive integer index
        produces the element of the tuple with that index. Thus, for example, < 1 ,2 , true>@3
        = tru e.


2.7.7   Records
        A variable var is declared to be of a record type by a declaration of the form
            var: record { idents\ : basetype1, . . . , identsn: basetypeny
        where identSj is a comma-separated list of component selectors and basetypez is the
        corresponding components’ type.
            A record constant is a tuple, each of whose elements is a pair consisting of
        an identifier (called the selector) and a value, separated by a colon. All values of
        a particular record type must have the same set of identifiers and, for each identifier,
        the values must be of the same type, but the values corresponding to different
        selectors may be of different types. For example, the type ib p a ir defined by the
        type definition
            ib p a ir = record { i n t : in te g e r,
                                 b o o l: boolean}
        has as its members pairs of the form < i n t : / ,b o o l: fc), where i is an integer and b is
        a Boolean. The order of the pairs in a member of a record type is immaterial; thus,
        for example, < in t : 3 , b ool: tr u e ) and <bool: t r u e , in t :3> are identical record con­
        stants. The following are also examples of record constants:
            < r l:1 .0 ,im :- 1 .0 >     < l e f t : 1 , r i g h t : 2 , v a l :t r u e )
34      Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


        The binary operator “ . ” when applied to a record and an expression whose value
        is one of the record’s selectors produces the corresponding component’s value. For
        example, in the code sequence

            ib p a ir = record { i n t : in te g e r,
                                 b ool: boolean}

            b: boolean
            ib p : ib p a ir

            ibp := <int:2,bool:true)
            ibp.int := 3
            b := ibp.bool

        the final values of ibp and b are < i n t : 3 , b o o l:tr u e ) and tru e, respectively.


2.7.8   Unions
        A union type is the union of the sets of values in the types that make up the union.
        A variable var is declared to be of a union type by a declaration of the form

            var: basetype x u . . . u basetypen

        where basetype{ ranges over the types of the sets making up the union type.
            As an example of a union type, consider in te g e r u boolean. An element of this
        type is either an integer or a Boolean.
            All the operators that apply to sets apply to unions. If the sets making up a union
        type are disjoint, then the set an element of the union belongs to may be determined
        by using the “ member o f” operator “ e ” .


2.7.9   Functions
        A function type has a domain type (written to the left of the arrow) and a range type
        (written to the right of the arrow).
            A variable var is declared to be of a function type by a declaration of the form

            var: basetype x x . . . x basetypen —> basetype0

        where for i = 1, . . . , basetype, is the type of the /th component of the domain and
        basetype0 is the type of the range.
             A function constant with n argument positions is a set each of whose elements
        is an (n + l)-tuple whose first n members are of the 1st through « th domain types,
        respectively, and whose (n + l ) st member is of the range type. To be a function, the
        set of tuples must be single-valued, i.e., if two tuples have the same first n members,
        they must have the same (n + l ) st member also.
             As an example of a function type, consider boolean —> in teg er. A variable or
        constant of this type is a set of pairs whose first member is a Boolean and whose
         Section 2.7      Data Types and Expressions                                         35


         second is an integer. It may also be expressed by an assignment or assignments
         involving the name of the type. Thus, given the declaration

              A: boolean — > integer

         we could write, for example, either

              A := {<true,3>,<false,2>>

         or

              A(true) := 3
              A(false) := 2

         to assign a particular function to be the value of A.
             A function need not have a defined value for every element of its domain.


2.7.10   Compiler-Specific Types
         The compiler-specific types are all named with an uppercase initial letter and are
         introduced as needed in the text. They may be either simple or constructed, as
         necessary. For example, the types Var, Vocab, and Operator are all simple types,
         while the types Procedure, Block, and Edge defined by

              Block = array [••] of array [••] of MIRInst
              Procedure = Block
              Edge = Node x Node

         are constructed. The type MIRInst is also constructed and is defined in Section 4.6.1.


2.7.11   The Value n i l
         The value n i l is a member of every type. It is the value of any variable that has not
         been initialized. In most contexts, using it as an operand in an expression causes the
         result to be n il. For example, 3 + n i l equals n il.
             The only expressions in which using n i l as an operand in an expression does
         not produce n i l as the result are equality and inequality comparisons, as follows:

              Expression      Result
              nil = nil       true
              a = nil         false
              nil * nil       false
              a * nil         true

         where a is any value other than n il.
              In addition, n i l may appear as the right-hand side of an assignment (Figure 2.2,
         line 13) and as an argument to or return value from a procedure.
36       Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


2.7.12   The Size Operator
         The operator “ I I” applies to objects of all constructed types. In each case, its value
         is the number of elements in its argument, as long as its argument is of finite size.
         For example, if A is declared to be
             A: array [1 • •5 ,1 * *5] of boolean
         and f is declared and defined to be
             f : integer x integer — > boolean

             f(l,l) := true
             f (1,2) := false
             f(3,4) := true
         then
                I{ 1 , 7 , 2 3 } I = 3
                I [ * a * , * b * , * e * , ' c ' , ' b 1] I = 5
                I<rl:1.0,im:-l.0)I = 2
                IA| = 25
                If I = 3
         If x is of infinite size, Ix I is undefined.


2.8      Statements
         Statements include assignments (e.g., Figure 2.1, lines 12 and 19), procedure and
         function calls (Figure 2.1, line 19 and Figure 2.2, line 34), returns (Figure 2.2, lines
         29 and 40), gotos (Figure 2.2, line 35), ifs (Figure 2.1, lines 22 through 24), cases
         (Figure 2.2, lines 25 through 31), and for loops (Figure 2.1, lines 16 through 25),
         while loops (Figure 2.1, lines 14 through 26), and repeat loops (Figure 2.2, lines 24
         through 32). Their syntax is given in Table 2.7.
             A statement may be labeled (Figure 2.2, line 38) with an identifier followed by
         a colon.
             Each structured statement’s body is delimited by keywords, such as i f and f i.

2.8.1    Assignment Statements
         An assignment statement consists of a series of one or more left-hand parts, each
         followed by an assignment operator, and a right-hand part (Figure 2.1, lines 10,12,
         15, 19, and 21). Each left-hand part may be a variable name or the name of an
         element of a variable, such as a member of a record, array, sequence, or tuple, or
         a function value. The assignment operator in each of the left-hand parts except the
         last must be “ : = ” . The last assignment operator may be either “ : =” (Figure 2.1, lines
         10 and 17 and Figure 2.2, lines 26 through 28) or an extended assignment operator
         in which the colon is replaced by a binary operator whose left-hand operand and
         result have the same type (Figure 2.1, line 19 and Figure 2.2, lines 19 and 39). For
         example, all the assignments in the following code are legal:
                Section 2.8    Statements                                                              37

T A B L E 2.7   Syntax o f ican statements.

                Statement                   AssignStmt \ ProcFuncStmt \ ReturnStmt
                                            | GotoStmt | IfStmt \ CaseStmt \ WhileStmt
                                            | ForStmt \ RepeatStmt \ Label : Statement
                                            | Statement ;
                Label                       Identifier
                AssignStmt                  [LeftSide :=}* LeftSide {: | BinaryOper} = Expr
                LeftSide                    Variable \ ArrayElt \ SequenceElt \ TupleElt \ RecordElt
                                            | FuncElt
                ArrayElt                    LeftSide [ Expr x , ]
                SequenceElt                 LeftSide 1 Expr
                TupleElt                    LeftSide @Expr
                RecordElt                   LeftSide . Expr
                FuncElt                     LeftSide ArgList
                ProcEuncStmt                ProcFuncExpr
                ReturnStmt                  return [Expr]
                GotoStmt                    goto Label
                IfStmt                      if Expr then Statement* {elif Statement*}*
                                            [else Statement*] f i
                CaseStmt                    case Expr of [CaseLabel : Statement*}+
                                            [default : Statement*] esac
                WhileStmt                   while Expr do Statement* od
                ForStmt                     for Iterator do Statement* od
                Iterator                    [Variable       Expr [by Expr] to Expr
                                            | each Variable x , e [Expr \ TypeExpr}} [(E xp r)]
                RepeatStmt                  repeat Statement* until Expr i*



                    recex = record {lt,rt: boolean}
                    i, j : integer
                    f : integer — > (boolean — > integer)
                    g: integer — > sequence of recex
                    p: sequence of integer
                    t: boolean x boolean
                    r: recex

                    i := 3
                    j := i += 1
                    f(3)(true) := 7
                    g(0)12.It := true
                    p!2 := 3
                    t@l := true
                    r.rt := r.lt := false
38      Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


        The right-hand part may be any type-compatible expression (see Section 2.7). The
        left- and right-hand parts of an assignment must be of the same type when an
        extended assignment operator is expanded to its ordinary form. The right-hand
        side following an extended assignment operator is evaluated as if it had parentheses
        around it. For example, the assignment
            S := SI u= {a} n X

        is equivalent to
            S := SI := SI u ({a} n X)

        which, in turn, is equivalent to
            SI := SI u ({a} n X)
            S := SI

        rather than to
            SI := (SI u {a»       n X
            S := SI


2.8.2   Procedure Call Statements
        A procedure call statement has the form of a procedure expression, i.e.,
        ProcFuncExpr in Table 2.5. It consists of a procedure name followed by a parenthe­
        sized list of arguments separated by commas. It causes the named procedure to be
        invoked with the given arguments.

2.8.3   Return Statements
        A return statement consists of the keyword retu rn followed optionally by an ex­
        pression.


2.8.4   Goto Statements
        A goto statement consists of the keyword goto followed by a label.

2.8.5   If Statements
        An if statement has the form
            i f conditiono then
                   thenjbody
            e l i f conditioni then
                   elif-body \

            e l i f conditionn then
                   elif.bodyn
        Section 2.8         Statements                                                        39

            e ls e
                     elsejb o d y
            fi
        with the e l i f and e ls e parts optional. The conditions are Boolean-valued expres­
        sions and are evaluated in the short-circuit manner, e.g., given p V q, q is evaluated
        if and only if p evaluates to f a ls e . Each of the bodies is a sequence of zero or more
        statements.

2.8.6   Case Statements
        A case statement has the form
                     case selector of
            la b e l\:      body\
            la b e h :      b od y i

            labeln :        bodyn
            d e fa u lt: bodyo
                  esac
        with the default part optional. Each label is a constant of the same type as the selector
        expression, which must be of a simple type or an enumerated type. Each body is a
        sequence of zero or more statements. As in Pascal, after executing one of the bodies,
        execution continues with the statement following the “ e sa c ” closing delimiter. There
        must be at least one non-default case label and corresponding body.

2.8.7   While Statements
        A while statement has the form
            while condition do
                 w b ilejb o d y
            od
        The condition is a Boolean-valued expression and is evaluated in the short-circuit
        manner. The body is a sequence of zero or more statements.

2.8.8   For Statements
        A for statement has the form
            fo r iterator do
                 fo rjb o d y
            od
        The iterator may be numerical or enumerative. A numerical iterator specifies a
        variable, a range of values, and a parenthesized Boolean expression, such as “ i : = n
        by -1 to 1 (A [i] = 0 ) ” (see Figure 2.2, lines 12 through 14). The “ by” part is
40           Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)

             optional if it is “by 1” . The Boolean expression is optional and, if not supplied,
             the value tru e is used. The value of the variable may not be changed in the body of
             the loop.
                  An enumerative iterator, such as “ each n e n (n * a b c )” (see Figure 2.1, lines
             11 through 13 and lines 16 through 25), or “ each p ,q e T (p * q ) ”, selects all and
             only the elements of its set operand that satisfy the parenthesized Boolean expression
             following the set operand, in an indeterminate order. If the parenthesized Boolean
             expression is missing, the value tru e is used. If the variable series has more than
             one element, they all must satisfy the same criteria. For example, “ each m,n e n (1
             < m & m ^ n & n ^ 2 ) ” causes the pair of variables <m,n> to range over < 1 ,1>, <1,2>,
             and <2,2>, in some order. For any set S that appears in the iterator, the body of the
             for statement must not change S’s value.
                  The body is a sequence of zero or more statements.


2.8.9        Repeat Statements
             A repeat statement has the form

                   re p e a t
                        rep e a tjb o d y
                   u n t i l condition

             The body is a sequence of zero or more statements. The condition is a Boolean­
             valued expression and is evaluated in the short-circuit manner.


2.8.10       Keywords in ICAN
             The keywords in i c a n are given in Table 2.8. They are all reserved and may not be
             used as identifiers.

 TABLE 2.8 The keywords in ican .

             array              begin       boolean     by
             case               character   default     do
             each               elif        else        end
             enum               esac        false       fi
             for                goto        if          in
             inout              integer     nil         od
             of                 out         procedure   real
             record             repeat      return      returns
             sequence           set         to          true
             until              where       while
             Section 2.11        Exercises                                                           41


2.9          W rap-Up
             This chapter is devoted to describing ican , the informal notation used to present
             algorithms in this book.
                 The language allows for a rich set of predefined and constructed types, including
             ones that are specific to compiler construction, and is an expressive notation for
             expressions and statements. Each compound statement has an ending delimiter, and
             some, such as while and case statements, have internal delimiters too.
                 The informality of the language lies primarily in its not being specific about the
             semantics of constructions that are syntactically valid but semantically ambiguous,
             undefined, or otherwise invalid.


2.10         Further Reading
             There are no references for ican , as it was invented for use in this book.


2.11         Exercises
       2.1 (a) Describe how to translate an xbnf syntax representation into a representation
           that uses only concatenation, (b) Apply your method to rewrite the xbnf description
                 E          —►       V \ AE\ ( E ) \ ST \ S E \ T E
                 AE         —►       [ { E \n il} ]
                 ST         —►       - AC+ "
                 SE         —►       0 K E* >
                 TE         —►       < £ tx , >
       2.2 Show that arrays, sets, records, tuples, products, and functions are all “ syntactic
           sugar” in ican by describing how to implement them and their operations in a
           version of ican that does not include them (i.e., express the other type constructors
           in terms of the union and sequence constructors).
       2.3   (a) Write an ican algorithm to run a maze. That is, given a set of nodes N £ Node, a
             set of undirected arcs E £ Node x Node, and start and finish nodes s t a r t , g o a l € N,
             the algorithm should return a list of nodes that make up a path from s t a r t to g o a l,
             or n i l if there is no such path, (b) What is the time complexity of your algorithm in
             terms of n = INI and e = IEI ?
       2.4 Adapt your algorithm from the preceding exercise to solve the traveling salesman
           problem. That is, return a list of nodes beginning and ending with s t a r t that passes
           through every node other than s t a r t exactly once, or return n i l if there is no such
           path.
       2.5 Given a binary relation R on a set A, i.e., R £ A x A, write an ican procedure
           RTC(R,x,y) to compute its reflexive transitive closure. The reflexive transitive clo­
           sure of R, written R*, satisfies a R* b if and only if a = b or there exists a c such that
           a R c and c R* b, so RTC(R,x,y) returns tr u e if x R* y and f a l s e otherwise.
42              Informal Compiler Algorithm Notation (ICAN)


     ADV 2.6 We have purposely omitted pointers from ican because they present several serious
             issues that can be avoided entirely by excluding them. These include, for example,
             pointer aliasing, in which two or more pointers point to the same object, so that
             changing the referent of one of them affects the referents of the others also, and the
             possibility of creating circular structures, i.e., structures in which following a series
             of pointers can bring us back to where we started. On the other hand, excluding
             pointers may result in algorithms’ being less efficient than they would otherwise be.
             Suppose we were to decide to extend ican to create a language, call it pican, that
             includes pointers, (a) List advantages and disadvantages of doing so. (b) Discuss the
             needed additions to the language and the issues these additions would create for
             programmers and implementers of the language.
                                                                                     CHAPTER 3



                    Symbol-Table Structure




      I
           n this chapter we explore issues involved in structuring symbol tables to ac­
           commodate the features of modern programming languages and to make them
           efficient for compiled implementations of the languages.
           We begin with a discussion of the storage classes that symbols may belong
      to and the rules governing their visibility, or scope rules, in various parts of a
      program. Next we discuss symbol attributes and how to structure a local symbol
      table, i.e., one appropriate for a single scope. This is followed by a description of
      a representation for global symbol tables that includes importing and exporting
      of scopes, a programming interface to global and local symbol tables, and ican
      implementations of routines to generate loads and stores for variables according to
      their attributes.


3.1   Storage Classes, Visibility, and Lifetimes
      Most programming languages allow the user to assign variables to storage classes
      that prescribe scope, visibility, and lifetime characteristics for them. The rules gov­
      erning scoping also prescribe principles for structuring symbol tables and for repre­
      senting variable access at run time, as discussed below.
          A scope is a unit of static program structure that may have one or more variables
      declared within it. In many languages, scopes may be nested: procedures are scoping
      units in Pascal, as are blocks, functions, and files in C. The closely related concept
      of visibility of a variable indicates in what scopes the variable’s name refers to a
      particular instance of the name. For example, in Pascal, if a variable named a is
      declared in the outermost scope, it is visible everywhere in the program1 except

      1. In many languages, such as C, the scope of a variable begins at its declaration point in the code
      and extends to the end of the program unit, while in others, such as PL/I, it encompasses the entire
      relevant program unit.

                                                                                                      43
44   Symbol-Table Structure


     within functions that also declare a variable a and any functions nested within
     them, where the local a is visible (unless it is superseded by another declaration of
     a variable with the same name). If a variable in an inner scope makes a variable
     with the same name in a containing scope temporarily invisible, we say the inner
     one shadows the outer one.
          The extent or lifetime of a variable is the part of the execution period of the
     program in which it is declared from when it first becomes visible to when it is
     last visible. Thus, a variable declared in the outermost scope of a Pascal program
     has a lifetime that extends throughout the execution of the program, while one
     declared within a nested procedure may have multiple lifetimes, each extending from
     an entry to the procedure to the corresponding exit from it. A Fortran variable with
     the save attribute or a C static local variable has a noncontiguous lifetime—if it is
     declared within procedure f ( ), its lifetime consists of the periods during which f ( )
     is executing, and its value is preserved from each execution period to the next.
          Almost all languages have a global storage class that gives variables assigned to
     it an extent that covers the entire execution of the program and global scope, i.e., it
     makes them visible throughout the program, or in languages in which the visibility
     rules allow one variable to shadow another, it makes them visible wherever they are
     not shadowed. Examples of global scope include variables declared extern in C and
     those declared in the outermost scope in Pascal.
          Fortran has the common storage class, which differs from most scoping concepts
     in that an object may be visible in multiple program units that are not related by
     nesting and it may have different names in any or all of them. For example, given
     the common declarations

           common /blockl/il,jl

     and

           common / b l o c k l / i 2 , j2

     in routines f l ( ) and f 2 ( ), respectively, variables i l and i2 refer to the same
     storage in their respective routines, as do j l and j2 , and their extent is the whole
     execution of the program.
          Some languages, such as C, have a file or module storage class that makes a
     variable visible within a particular file or module and makes its extent the whole
     period of execution of the program.
          Most languages support an automatic or stack storage class that gives a variable
     a scope that is the program unit in which it is declared and an extent that lasts for a
     particular activation of that program unit. This may be associated with procedures,
     as in Pascal, or with both procedures and blocks within them, as in C and PL/I.
          Some languages allow storage classes that are static modifications of those
     described above. In particular, C allows variables to be declared s t a t i c , which
     causes them to be allocated storage for the duration of execution, even though
     they are declared within a particular function. They are accessible only within the
     function, and they retain their values from one execution of it to the next, like
     Fortran save variables.
      Section 3.2     Symbol Attributes and Symbol-Table Entries                              45


            Some languages allow data objects (and in a few languages, variable names) to
      have dynamic extent, i.e., to extend from their points of (implicit or explicit) alloca­
      tion to their points of destruction. Some, particularly lisp , allow dynamic scoping,
      i.e., scopes may nest according to calling relationships, rather than static nesting.
      With dynamic scoping, if procedure f ( ) calls g ( ) and g ( ) uses a variable x that
      it doesn’t declare, then the x declared in its caller f ( ) is used, or if there is none, in
      the caller of f ( ), and so on, regardless of the static structure of the program.
            Some languages, such as C, have an explicit v o l a t i l e storage class modifier
      that specifies that a variable declared volatile may be modified asynchronously, e.g.,
      by an I/O device. This imposes restrictions on optimizations that may be performed
      on constructs that access the variable.


3.2   Symbol Attributes and Symbol-Table Entries
      Each symbol in a program has associated with it a series of attributes that are derived
      both from the syntax and semantics of the source language and from the symbol’s
      declaration and use in the particular program. The typical attributes include a series
      of relatively obvious things, such as the symbol’s name, type, scope, and size. Others,
      such as its addressing method, may be less obvious.
           Our purpose in this section is to enumerate possible attributes and to explain
      the less obvious ones. In this way, we provide a description of the constituents
      of a symbol table, namely, the symbol-table entries. A symbol-table entry collects
      together the attributes of a particular symbol in a way that allows them to be easily
      set and retrieved.
           Table 3.1 lists a typical set of attributes for a symbol. The provision of both s iz e
      and boundary on the one hand and b i t s iz e and b itb d ry on the other allows for
      both unpacked and packed data representations.
           A type referent is either a pointer to or the name of a structure representing a
      constructed type (in ican, lacking pointers, we would use the latter). The provision
      of type, basetype, and machtype allows us to specify, for example, that the Pascal
      type
          array [ 1 . . 3 , 1 . . 5 ] of char
      has for its type field a type referent such as t2 , whose associated value is
      < a rra y ,2 , [<1, 3 ) , < 1 ,5>] ,char>, for its basetyp e simply char, and for its
      machtype the value byte. Also, the value of n e lt s for it is 15. The presence of
      the basereg and d isp fields allows us to specify that, for example, to access the
      beginning of our Pascal array we should form the address [r7+8] if b a se reg is r7
      and d isp is 8 for it.
           The most complex aspect of a symbol-table record is usually the value of the
      type attribute. Source-language types typically consist of the predefined ones, such
      as in teg er, char, r e a l, etc. in Pascal, and the constructed ones, such as Pascal’s
      enumerated, array, record, and set types. The predefined ones can be represented by
      an enumeration, and the constructed ones by tuples. Thus, the Pascal type template
          array [t 1 ,. . ., tn\ of tO
46            Symbol-Table Structure

 TA BLE 3.1   Typical fields in symbol-table entries.

              Name                 Type                        Meaning

              name                 Character string            The symbol’s identifier
              c la ss              Enumeration                     Storage class
              v o la t i le        Boolean                     Asynchronously accessed
              s iz e               Integer                         Size in bytes
              b its iz e           Integer                         Size in bits if not an integral
                                                                   number of bytes
              boundary             Integer                     Alignment in bytes
              b itb d ry           Integer                         Alignment in bits if not an
                                                                   integral number of bytes
              type                 Enumeration or                  Source-language data type
                                   type referent
              basetype             Enumeration or                  Source-language type of the
                                   type referent               elements of a constructed type
              machtype             Enumeration                     Machine type corresponding to
                                                               the source type, if simple, or the
                                                               type of the elements, if constructed
              n e lt s             Integer                         Number of elements
              r e g is t e r       Boolean                     True if the symbol’s value is
                                                                   in a register
              reg                  Character string                Name of register containing
                                                               the symbol’s value
              b ase reg            Character string                Name of the base register used
                                                                   to compute the symbol’s
                                                                   address
              d isp                Integer                         Displacement of symbol’s storage
                                                                   from value in base register




              can be represented by a tuple consisting of an enumerated value representing its
              constructor (array), the number of dimensions, and a sequence of representations
              of each of the dimensions t \ through tn, and the representation of its base type *0,
              i.e., the ican triple

                       < a r r a y ,« , [t 1 , . . .,tri\ , t 0>

              as in the exam ple above. Similarly, a record type tem plate

                       r e c o r d f \ : 11 ; . . . ; f n : tn end
            Section 3.3    Local Symbol-Table Management                                         47


            t l = array [0 ..5 ,1 ..1 0 ] of integer;
            t2 = record
                       t2a: integer;
                       t2b: Tt2;
                       t2c: array [1..3] of char;
                    end;
            t3 = array [1..100] of t2;
            (a)
            t l = <array,2 , [<0,5>,< 1 ,10>], integer)
            t2 = <record,3 , [< t2 a,in teger), <t2b,<pointer,t2>>,
                  <t2c,<array, 1 , [<1,3>],char>>]>
            t3 = <array, 1 , [<1, 100>],t2>
            (b)
 FIG. 3.1 (a) A series of Pascal type declarations, and (b) its representation by ican tuples.


            can be represented by a tuple consisting of an enumerated value representing its
            constructor (record), the number of fields, and a sequence of pairs comprising
            representations of the field identifiers fi and types ti, i.e.,
                  <record,«, [<^1 ,£l>,. ..,</«,£«>] >
                 Uses of names of constructed types in type definitions are represented by refer­
            ences to the definitions of those types. As a specific example, consider the Pascal type
            declarations in Figure 3.1(a), which are represented by ican structures like those
            shown in Figure 3.1(b). Note that they are recursive: the definition of t2 includes a
            reference to t2.
                 In all languages we are aware of, the predefined types are global and the user-
            defined types follow scoping rules identical to those for variables, so they can be
            represented by type tables (or graphs) that parallel the local and global symbol-table
            structures discussed below.


.3          Local Symbol-Table M anagement
            We next consider how to manage a symbol table that is local to a specific procedure,
            an issue that is fundamental to any approach to code generation.
                The interfaces of a set of procedures that create, destroy, and manipulate the
            symbol table and its entries are as follows (SymTab is the type representing symbol
            tables and Symbol is the type of symbols):
       New_Sym_Tab: SymTab — > SymTab
            Creates a new local symbol table with the given symbol table as its parent, or n i l
            if there is none (see the discussion of global symbol-table structure in Section 3.4),
            and returns the new (empty) local symbol table.
       Dest_Sym_Tab: SymTab — > SymTab
            Destroys the current local symbol table and returns its parent (or n i l if there is no
            parent).
48      Symbol-Table Structure


     Insert_Sym: SymTab x Symbol — > boolean
        Inserts an entry for the given symbol into the given symbol table and returns tru e,
        or if the symbol is already present, does not insert a new entry and returns f a l s e .
     Locate_Sym: SymTab x Symbol — > boolean
        Searches the given symbol table for the given symbol and returns tru e if it is found,
        or f a l s e if it is not.
     Get_Sym_Attr: SymTab x Symbol x Attr — > Value
        Returns the value associated with the given attribute of the given symbol in the given
        symbol table, if it is found, or n i l if not.
     Set_Sym_Attr: SymTab x Symbol x Attr x Value — > boolean
        Sets the given attribute of the given symbol in the given symbol table to the given
        value and returns tru e , if it is found, or returns f a l s e if not; each of the fields listed
        in Table 3.1 is considered an attribute, and there may be others as needed.
     Next_Sym: SymTab x Symbol — > Symbol
        Iterates over the symbol table, in some order, returning the symbol following the
        one that is its second argument; when called with the second argument set to n il,
        it returns the first symbol in the symbol table or n i l if the symbol table is empty;
        when called with the second argument set to the last symbol, it returns n il.
     More.Syms: SymTab x Symbol — > boolean
        Returns tru e if there are more symbols to iterate over and f a l s e otherwise; if the
        symbol argument is n il , it returns tru e if the symbol table is non-empty, or f a l s e
        if the symbol table is empty.
           Note the use of the type Value in the definitions of Get_Sym_Attr( ) and
        Set_Sym_Attr( ). It is intended to be a union type that encompasses all the types
        that attributes might have. Note, also, that the last two routines can be used to iterate
        over the symbols in a symbol table by being used in the following way:
            s := nil
            while More_Syms(symtab,s) do
               s := Next_Sym(symtab,s)
               if s * nil then
                  process sym bol s
               fi
            od
             A major consideration in designing a symbol table is implementing it so that
        symbol and attribute insertion and retrieval are both as fast as possible. We could
        structure the symbol table as a one-dimensional array of entries, but that would
        make searching relatively slow. Two alternatives suggest themselves, namely, a bal­
        anced binary tree or hashing. Both provide quick insertion, searching, and retrieval,
        at the expense of some work to keep the tree balanced or to compute hash keys. As
        discussed in Section 3.4 below, hashing with a chain of entries for each hash key
        is generally the better approach. The most appropriate implementation of it to deal
        with the scope rules of languages such as Modula-2, Mesa, Ada, and object-oriented
           Section 3.4         Global Symbol-Table Structure                                    49




                                       Entry 1.1     7
           Key 1
           Key 2
                                       Entry 2.3
                                       Entry n. 2
                                                     /
                                       Entry 2.2
                                       Entry n. 1

                                              :


                                       Entry 2.1
           Key n


                   Hash keys
                                       Entry n 3     /
                                    Symbol-table entries

 FIG. 3.2 Hashed local symbol table with a chain of buckets for each hash key.


           languages is to combine an array with hashing. Figure 3.2 shows a schematic view of
           how such a symbol table might be organized (“ Entry /./” represents the /th entry in
           the zth hash chain). The hash function should be chosen so as to distribute identifiers
           relatively evenly across the key values.


.4         Global Symbol-Table Structure
           The scoping and visibility rules of the source language dictate the structure of the
           global symbol table. For many languages, such as Algol 60, Pascal, and PL/I, the
           scoping rules have the effect of structuring the entire global symbol table as a tree
           of local symbol tables with the local table for the global scope as its root and the
           local tables for nested scopes as the children of the table for the scope they are
           nested in. Thus, for example, if we have a Pascal program with the structure given
           in Figure 3.3, then the structure of its global symbol table is as shown in Figure 3.4.
                However, a simpler structure can be used for such languages in a compiler since,
           at any point during compilation, we are processing a particular node of this tree and
           only need access to the symbol tables on the path from that node to the root of the
           tree. Thus, a stack containing the local symbol tables on a path is sufficient. When
           we enter a new, more deeply nested scope, we push a local table onto the stack,
           and when we exit a scope, we pop its table from the stack. Figure 3.5 shows the
           sequence of global symbol tables that occurs during the processing of the program
           in Figure 3.3. Now any reference to a variable not found in the current local scope
           can be searched for in the ancestor scopes. For example, focusing on procedure i ( ),
           the use of variable b refers to the local b declared in i ( ), while the use of a refers
           to the one declared in g ( ), and the use of c refers to the global c declared in the
           outermost scope e ( ).
50              Sym bol-Table Structure


                program e;
                   var a, b, c: integer;
                   procedure f ;
                      var a, b, c: integer;
                   begin
                      a := b + c
                   end;
                   procedure g;
                         var a, b: integer;
                      procedure h;
                         var c, d: integer;
                      begin
                         c := a + d;
                      end;
                      procedure i;
                         var b, d: integer;
                      begin
                         b := a + c
                      end;
                   begin
                      b := a + c
                   end;
                   procedure j ;
                      var b, d: integer;
                   begin
                      b := a + d
                   end;
                begin
                   a := b + c
                end .

     FIG* 1*3   Nesting structure of an example Pascal program.


                                  e ( ) ’s symtab
                                   integer a
                                   integer b
                                   integer c



                f ( ) ’s symtab   g ( ) ’s symtab     j ( ) ’s symtab
                 integer a
                                   integer a           integer b
                 integer b
                                   integer b           integer d
                 integer c



                         h( ) ’s symtab     i ( ) ’s symtab
                           integer c         integer b
                           integer d         integer d

     FIG* 3*4 Tree of local symbol tables for the Pascal code in Figure 3.3.
          Section 3.4      Global Symbol-Table Structure                                       51

          Routine
          being
          compiled e ( )   f( )      g( )     h( )     i( )     j( )     e( )



          2?01-                              Em Em
          stedc            [fn] gr>] go]                       Em
                  |e ( ) | |e ( ) | |e ( ) | |e ( ) | |e ( ) | |e ( ) | [e ( ) |

FIG. 3.5 Symbol-table stacks occurring during compiling the Pascal code in Figure 3.3.


               The stack of local symbol tables can be implemented as a stack of arrays and
          hash tables, with each of them implemented as described in Section 3.3. A better
          structure uses two stacks, one to contain identifiers and the other to indicate the
          base of each local table, with a single hash table accessed by hashing a sym bol’s
          name as before. If we take this approach, New_Sym_Tab( ) pushes a new entry onto
          the block stack, Insert_Sym( ) adds an entry at the top of the symbol stack and
          puts it at the beginning of its hash chain, and Locate_Sym( ) needs to search only
          along the chain the symbol hashes to. Dest_Sym_Tab( ) removes from all chains the
          entries above the current entry in the block stack, all of which are at the heads of the
          chains, and deallocates the top entry on the block stack. Figure 3.6 gives an example
          of this scoping model, assuming e and f have the same hash value.



                                ft




                           Symbol stack

FIG. 3.6 Hashed global symbol table with a block stack.
52   Symbol-Table Structure


           The only remaining issue is dealing with scoping constructs that do not obey the
     tree structure discussed above, such as Modula-2’s import and export, Ada’s pack­
     ages and use statement, and C++’s inheritance mechanism. Compilation systems for
     the first two languages must provide a mechanism for saving and retrieving interface
     definitions for modules and packages, respectively. A useful distinction due to Gra­
     ham, Joy, and Roubine [GraJ79], on which the following model of scoping is based,
     is between open scopes, for which the visibility rules correspond directly to the nest­
     ing of the scopes, and closed scopes, for which visibility is explicitly specified in a
     program. For open scopes, the mechanism we have described above is sufficient.
           Closed scopes, on the other hand, make a specified set of names visible in certain
     other scopes, independent of nesting. For example, in Modula-2 a module may
     include a list of names of objects it exports, and other modules may import any
     or all of those names by listing them explicitly. Ada’s package mechanism allows
     a package to export a set of objects and allows other modules to import them by
     indicating explicitly that they use the package. These and the other explicit scoping
     mechanisms can be implemented in the stack-plus-hashing symbol-table model by
     keeping, for each identifier, a list of the scope level numbers of scopes in which the
     identifier is visible. This would be simple to maintain, but it can be done with less
     space overhead.
          A simplification results from noting that the level numbers in such a list must be
     consecutive, since a scope can export an identifier only if it is visible in it and can
     import it only explicitly or if it is visible in the containing scope. The process can be
     further simplified by making sure that each entry is removed from the symbol table
     when the outermost scope in which it is visible is exited—then we need only record
     the level of the innermost scope in which it is visible and update the level number
     on entry to and exit from such a scope. This provides fast implementations for
     scope entry, symbol insertion, and attribute setting and retrieval, but could require
     searching the entire symbol table upon leaving a scope to find the entries that need
     to be deleted.
          The most effective adaptation of the stack-plus-hashing model to closed scopes
     uses the stack structure to reflect the scope that a symbol is declared in or the out­
     ermost level it is exported to, and the hash structure to implement visibility rules. It
     reorders the elements of the hash chain into which an imported symbol is to be en­
     tered to bring it to the front before setting its innermost-level-number field, and does
     the same reordering for each symbol the scope exports. It then enters locally declared
     symbols ahead of those already in the hash chain. The reader can verify that the sym­
     bols in each chain are kept in an order that reflects the visibility rules. On exiting a
     scope, we must remove from the hash chains the local symbols that are not exported,
     which are among those whose stored level numbers match the level number of the
     current scope. If such a symbol is declared in a scope containing the current one or
     is exported to such a scope, then we can determine that from the stack structure of
     the symbol table and can leave the symbol in the hash chain, subtracting one from
     its innermost level number; otherwise, we remove the symbol from its hash chain.
          As an example, consider the code shown in Figure 3.7. Upon entering procedure
     f ( ), the symbol table is as shown in Figure 3.8(a). Upon entering g ( ), we have a
     newly declared d and variables a and b (note that we assume that b and d have the
           Section 3.4    Global Symbol-Table Structure                                      53


           program
              var a, b, c, d
              procedure f( )
                  var b
                  procedure g( )
                     var d
                      import a, b from P
                  end
               end
           end
           package P
              export a, b
           end

FIG. 3.7   An example of code with an import.



                               ft




           Hash keys       Symbol stack         Block stack

           (a)


                               ft




           Hash keys       Symbol stack         Block stack

           (b)
FIG. 3.8   (a) Hashed global symbol table with innermost level numbers, and (b) after entering
           g ( ), a scope with local variable d and imported symbols a and b.
54       Symbol-Table Structure


         same hash value) imported from package P. The resulting symbol-table structure is
         as shown in Figure 3.8(b). Note that the hash chain containing the bs and d in (a)
         has been extended so that the imported b comes first, followed by the newly declared
         d, and then the other three previous entries. The innermost level numbers have been
         adjusted to indicate that the imported a and b, g ( ) ’s d, and the global a are visible
         inside g ( ). To return to the previous state, i.e., the state represented in (a), we pop
         the top entry off the block stack and all the symbol entries at or above the point it
         indicates in the symbol stack and adjust the hash chains to reflect deletion of those
         symbols. Since we did not reorder the hash chains for the enclosing scopes when we
         entered g ( ), this returns the symbol table to its previous state.
              To support the global symbol-table structure, we add two routines to the inter­
         face described in Section 3.3:

      Encl_Sym_Tab: SymTab x Symbol — > SymTab
         Returns the nearest enclosing symbol table that declares its second argument, or n il
         if there is none.
      Depth_Sym_Tab: SymTab — > integer
         Returns the depth of the given symbol table relative to the current one, which, by
         convention, has depth zero.


3.5      Storage Binding and Symbolic
         Storage binding translates variable names into addresses, a process that must occur
         either before or during code generation. In our intermediate-language hierarchy, it is
         part of the process of translating a routine from mir to lir (see Chapter 4), which,
         in addition to translating names to addresses, expands mir assignments into loads,
         operations, and stores, and expands calls to instruction sequences.
              Each variable is assigned an address, or more accurately an addressing method,
         appropriate to its storage class. We use the latter term because, for example, a local
         variable in a procedure is not assigned a fixed machine address (or a fixed address
         relative to the base of a module), but rather a stack location that is accessed by an
         offset from a register whose value generally does not point to the same location each
         time the procedure is invoked.
              For storage binding, variables are divided into four major categories: global,
         global static, stack, and stack static variables. In languages that allow variables or a
         whole scope to be imported, we must consider that case as well.
              Global variables and those with static storage class are generally assigned either
         to fixed relocatable addresses or to offsets from a base register known as the global
         pointer.2 Some R i s e compilers, such as those provided by mips for the mips archi­
         tecture, use offsets from a base register for all globals up to a maximum size the
         programmer can control and, thus, achieve single-instruction access for all the glob­
         als that fit into the available range. Stack variables are assigned offsets from the stack


         2. In generating position-independent code, the latter approach is used, as discussed in Section 5.7.
Section 3.5    Storage Binding and Symbolic Registers                                55


pointer or frame pointer, so they appear and disappear with procedure invocations
and, thus, their locations may change from one invocation to another.
     In most languages, heap objects are allocated space dynamically and are accessed
by means of pointers whose values are set by the memory allocator. However, in
some languages, such as lisp , such objects may be “ interned,” i.e., assigned names
that access them directly.
     An alternative approach for stack variables and, in some cases, for global vari­
ables as well, is to allocate them to registers, rather than to memory locations. Of
course, it is essential that such variables fit into a register and registers are not
generally indexable, so this approach cannot be used for arrays. Also, one cannot
generally assign many variables to registers before or during code generation, since
there is only a fixed set of registers available. However, one can assign scalar vari­
ables to an unbounded set of symbolic registers, i.e., to names that can be assigned
to real registers or to memory locations later in the compilation process. This is
done in compilers that use the graph-coloring approach to global register allocation
discussed in Section 16.3. Symbolic registers are allocated by simply incrementing
a counter, so the first variable is assigned to sO, the next to s i , and so on. Alter­
natively, the register allocator can pack variables assigned to storage locations into
registers and then delete the associated storage accesses, as is done in the priority-
based graph-coloring approach discussed in Section 16.4.
     Figure 3.9 gives an ican routine named Bind_Local_V ars( ) that binds lo­
cal variables to storage locations using the symbol-table manipulation routines de­
scribed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4. The fields in symbol-table entries include at least the
ones described in Table 3.1.
     Bind_Local_Vars( ) assigns each static variable a displacement and, for stack-
allocated variables, assigns a displacement and the frame pointer as the base register.
For records, we cycle through the elements, assigning them displacements and base
registers. The value of i n it d is p is the displacement of the first location in the
stack frame that is available to allocate. We assume that Initdisp and the bases
of the stack frame and static storage area are doubleword-aligned to begin with.
Note that we assign negative offsets from f p to local symbols, as discussed below in
Chapter 5, and positive offsets to statics. We ignore the possibility of packed records,
as discussed in Section 5.1. Round_Abs_Up( ) is used to ensure proper boundary
alignment. The function abs ( ) returns the absolute value of its argument, and the
function ceil( ) returns the least integer greater than or equal to its argument.
Binding to symbolic registers is virtually the same and handling global variables is
similar, except that it may need to be spread out across a series of compilation units,
depending on the source language’s structure.
     As an example of storage binding, consider the mir fragment in Figure 3.10(a),
where a is a global integer variable, b is a local integer variable, and c [ 0. . 9] is
a local variable holding an array of integers. Let gp be the register pointing to
the global area and fp be the frame pointer. Then we might assign a to offset 8
beyond gp, b to fp-20, and c to fp-6 0 (note that fetching c [1] results in loading
from location fp-56: this is the case because c[0] is located at fp-6 0 and the
elements of c [ ] are 4 bytes long); binding each variable to its location in the
mir code would result in the lir code shown in Figure 3.10(b). (Of course, the
56              Symbol-Table Structure


                procedure Bind_Local_Vars(symtab,Initdisp)
                   symtab: in SymTab
                   Initdisp: in integer
                begin
                   symclass: enum {local, local.static}
                   symbasetype: Type
                   i, symsize, staticloc := 0, stackloc := Initdisp,
                       symnelts: integer
                   s := nil: Symbol
                   while More_Syms(symtab,s) do
                       s := Next_Sym(symtab,s)
                       symclass := Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,class)
                       symsize := Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,size)
                       symbasetype := Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,basetype)
                       case symclass of
                local:    if symbasetype = record then
                             symnelts := Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,nelts)
                             for i := 1 to symnelts do
                                symsize := Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,<i,size))
                                I| allocate local symbols at negative offsets
                                II from the frame pointer
                                stackloc -= symsize
                                stackloc := Round_Abs_Up(stackloc,symsize)
                                Set_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,reg,"fp")
                                Set_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,<i,disp>,stackloc)
                             od
                          else
                             stackloc -= symsize
                             stackloc := Round.Abs_Up(stackloc,symsize)
                             Set_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,reg,"fp")
                             Set_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,disp,stackloc)
                          fi

     FIG. 3.9 Routines to do storage binding of local variables.


               fourth instruction is redundant, since the value it loads is stored by the preceding
               instruction. The MiR-to-LiR translator might recognize this, or the task might be left
               to the postpass optimizer, as described in Section 18.11.)
                    If we were using symbolic registers, b would be assigned to one, say s2. Global
               variable a might also be, depending on whether the register allocator assigns globals
               to registers or not; we assume for now that it does. The resulting lir code would be
               as shown in Figure 3.10(c). Note that c [1] has not been assigned a symbolic register
               because it is an array element.
                    There are several possible approaches to arranging local variables in the stack
               frame. We could simply assign them to consecutive locations in the frame, allowing
               enough space for each, but this might require us to put variables on boundaries in
               memory that are inappropriate for accessing them quickly—e.g., it might result in a
               word-sized object being put on a halfword boundary, requiring two halfword loads,
           Section 3.5      Storage Binding and Symbolic Registers                             57

           local_static:
                    if symbasetype = record then
                        symnelts    Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,nelts)
                       for i := 1 to symnelts do
                           symsize := Get_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,<i,size))
                           I| allocate local static symbols at positive offsets
                           I| from the beginning of static storage
                           staticloc := Round_Abs_Up(staticloc,symsize)
                           Set.Sym.Attr(symtab,s,<i,disp>,staticloc)
                           staticloc + - symsize
                       od
                    else
                        staticloc := Round_Abs_Up(staticloc,symsize)
                       Set_Sym_Attr(symtab,s,disp,staticloc)
                        staticloc += symsize
                    fi
                 esac
              od
           end    II Bind_Local_Vars

           procedure Round.Abs_Up(m,n) returns integer
              m, n: in integer
           begin
              return sign(m) * ceil(abs(float(m)/float(n))) * abs(n)
           end    II Round.Abs_Up

 FIG. 3.9 (continued)


           a shift, and an “ or” at worst, in place of a single word load. If there are no half­
           word loads, as in the Alpha architecture, an “ and” would be needed also. We might
           remedy this by guaranteeing that each stack frame starts on a doubleword bound­
           ary and leaving gaps between objects to cause them to appear on the appropriate
           boundaries, but this wastes space, which may be important because Rise loads and
           stores provide only short offsets and cisc instructions might require use of longer
           offsets and may impact cache performance.


           a <- a * 2            r l <r- [gp+8]       sO <- sO * 2
                                 r2 <- rl * 2
                                  [gp+8] <- r2
           b <r- a + c[l]        r3 <- [gp+8]         si <- [fp-56]
                                 r4      [fp-56]      s2 <- sO + si
                                 r5 <- r3 + r4
                                  [fp-20] <- r5

           (a)                   (b)                  (c)
FIG. 3.10 (a) A mir fragment and two translations to lir , one with names bound to storage
          locations (b) and the other with simple variables bound to symbolic registers (c).
58              Symbol-Table Structure


                int i;
                double float x;
                short int j ;
                float y;

     FIG. 3.11 C local variable declarations.

                     We can do better by sorting variables by the alignments they need, largest first,
                and by guaranteeing that each stack frame is aligned in memory on a boundary
                that provides the most efficient access. We would sort all quantities needing double-
                word alignment at the beginning of the frame, followed by word-aligned quantities,
                then halfwords, and finally bytes. If the beginning of the stack frame is doubleword-
                aligned, this guarantees that each variable is on an appropriate boundary. For exam­
                ple, given the C variable declarations shown in Figure 3.11, we could store them in
                declaration order as shown in Figure 3.12(a) or store them sorted by size as shown
                in Figure 3.12(b). Note that sorting them not only makes access to them faster, it
                also frequently saves space. Since no language definition we know of permits one to
                rely on the arrangement in memory of local variables, this sorting is safe.
                     A third approach is to sort by size, but to allocate smallest first, respecting
                boundary alignment. This may use somewhat more space than the preceding ap­
                proach, but for large stack frames it makes more variables accessible with short
                offsets.
                     How to store large local data structures, such as arrays, requires more thought.
                We could store them directly in the stack frame, and some compilers do so, but
                this might require offsets larger than the immediate field allowed in instructions to
                access array elements and other variables. Note that if we put large objects near the
                beginning of the stack frame, then other objects require large offsets from f p, while
                if we put them at the end of the frame, the same thing occurs relative to sp. We could
                allocate a second base register (and, perhaps, more) to extend the stack frame, but
                even that might not make it large enough. An alternative is to allocate large objects in
                the middle of the stack frame (or possibly elsewhere), and to store pointers to them
                in the stack frame at small offsets from f p. This requires an extra load to access an
                array, but the cost of the load is frequently amortizable over many array accesses,
                especially if the array is used heavily in one or more loops.




                (b)
     FIG. 3.12 (a) Unsorted aligned and (b) sorted frame layouts for the declarations shown in
               Figure 3.11 (offsets in bytes).
   Section 3.6     Approaches to Generating Loads and Stores                                59


   Approaches to Generating Loads and Stores
   For concreteness, we assume for now that we are generating assembly code for a
   32-bit sparc-V9 system, except that we use a flat register file, rather than register
   windows.
       The procedures described below generate the loads needed to put values into
   registers to be used and the stores to put computed values into the appropriate
   memory locations. They could also modify the corresponding symbol-table entries
   to reflect the location of each value, i.e., whether it is in a register and, if so,
   which register and generate moves between the integer and floating-point registers,
   as necessary, so that values are in the type of registers they need to be in to be used.
Sym_to_Reg: SymTab x Var — > Register
   Generates a load from the storage location corresponding to a given variable to a
   register, register pair, or register quadruple of the appropriate type, and returns the
   name of the first register. The global data types and structures used in the process
   are given in Figure 3.13; a straightforward version of Sym_to_Reg( ) is given in
   Figure 3.14 and auxiliary routines used in the process are given in Figure 3.15.
   The variable GloSymtab has as its value the global symbol table. The variable
   StaticLinkOff set holds the offset from register fp of the current procedure’s static
   link. The following functions are used in the code:
     1. Locate.Sym (symtab, i/) returns tru e if variable v is in symbol table sym tab and
        f a l s e otherwise (see Section 3.3).
     2. Enel_Sym_Tab {sym tab , v ) returns the symbol table, stepping outward from
        sym tab , in which variable v is found or n i l if it is not found (see Section 3.4).
     3. Depth_Sym_Tab(sy m tab l f sym tab) returns the difference in depths from the
        current symbol table sym tab to the enclosing one sy m tab l (see Section 3.4).
     4. Get_Sym_Attr ( sy m tab , v , attr) returns the value of the attr attribute of variable
        v in symbol table sym tab (see Section 3.3).
     5. Short.C on st (c) returns tru e if c fits into 13 bits (the length of a sparc short
        constant operand) and f a l s e otherwise.
     6. G e n .In st ( o p c , o p d s) outputs the instruction with opcode opc and argument
        list op ds.
     7. Reg_Char ( reg) converts its R e g iste r operand reg to the corresponding charac­
        ter string.
     8. Find.Opcode (stype) returns the index in the array LdStType of the entry with
        type stype.
Sym_to_Reg_Force: SymTab x Var x Register
   Generates a load from the storage location corresponding to a given symbol to the
   named register, register pair, or register quadruple of the appropriate type. This
   routine can be used, for example, to force procedure arguments to the appropriate
   registers.
Alloc_Reg: SymTab x Var — > Register
   Allocates a register, register pair, or register quadruple of the appropriate type to
   hold the value of its variable argument and sets the reg field in the variable’s
60               Sym bol-Table Structure


                 SymType = enum {byte, uns_byte, short, uns.short, int,
                    uns_int, long_int, uns_long_int, float, dbl_float,
                    quad_float}
                 LdStType = array [1**11] of record
                                   {type: SymType,
                                    LdOp, StOp: CharString}
                 LdStType :=
                     II types, load instructions, and store instructions
                     [<type:byte,         LdOp:"ldsb", St Op "stsb">,
                      <type:uns_byte,     LdOp:"ldub", St Op "stub"),
                      <type:short,        LdOp:"ldsh", St Op "stsh"),
                      <type:uns_short,    LdOp:"lduh", St Op "stuh"),
                      <type:int,          LdOp:"ldsw", St Op "stsw"),
                      <type:uns_int,      LdOp:"lduw", St Op "stuw"),
                      <type:long_int,     LdOp:"ldd",   St Op "std">,
                      <type:uns_long_int, LdOp:"ldd",   St Op "std">,
                      <type:float,        LdOp:"ldf",   St Op "stf">,
                      <type:dbl_float,    LdOp:"lddf", St Op "stdf">,
                      <type:quad_float,   LdOp:"ldqf", St Op "stqf">]
                 GloSymtab: SymTab
                 StaticLinkOffset: integer
                 Depth: integer

     FIG. 3.13   Global types and data structures used to generate loads and stores.


                 symbol-table entry, unless there already is a register allocated, and (in either case)
                 returns the name of the first register.
            Reg_to_Sym: SymTab x R e g is t e r —> Var
               Generates a store of the second argument’s value (a register name) to the variable’s
               storage location. Code for a straightforward version of Reg_to_Sym( ) is given in
               Figure 3.14 and uses the global types and data structures in Figure 3.13 and the
               auxiliary routines in Figure 3.15.
            Alloc_Reg_Anon: enum { i n t , f i t } x in t e g e r —> R e g is t e r
                Allocates a register, register pair, or register quadruple of the appropriate type
                (according to the value of the second argument, which may be 1, 2, or 4) and returns
                the name of the first register. It does not associate the register with a symbol, unlike
                A lloc_R eg( ).
            Free_R eg: R e g is t e r —> 0
                Returns its argument register to the pool of available registers.

                      Rather than simply loading a value into a register before using it and storing a
                 value as soon as it has been computed, we can easily provide more sophisticated ver­
                 sions of the routines that move values to and from registers. The first improvement
                 is to track what is in each register and, if a needed value is already in a register of the
                 appropriate type, to use it without redundantly loading it; if the value is already in a
                 register, but of the wrong type, we can generate a move instead of a load if the target
                 architecture supports moves between the integer and floating-point registers. If we
            Section 3.6     Approaches to Generating Loads and Stores                               61


            procedure Sym_to_Reg(symtab,v) returns Register
                symtab: in SymTab
               v : in Var
            begin
                symtabl: SymTab
                symdisp: integer
                Opcode: CharString
                symreg: Register
                symtype: SymType
                symtabl := Find_Sym_Tab(symtab,v)
                if Get_Sym_Attr(symtabl,v,register) then
                   return Get_Sym_Attr(symtabl,v,reg)
               fi
                symtype := Get_Sym_Attr(symtabl,v,type)
               Opcode :* LdStType[Find.Opcode(symtype)] .LdOp
                symreg := Alloc_Reg(symtabl,v)
                symdisp := Get_Sym_Attr(symtabl,v,disp)
                I| generate load instruction and return loaded register
               Gen_LdSt(symtabl,Opcode,symreg,symdisp,false)
               return symreg
            end      I| Sym_to_Reg

            procedure Reg_to_Sym(symtab,r,v)
                symtab: in SymTab
               r: in Register
               v : in Var
            begin
                symtabl: SymTab
               disp: integer
               Opcode: CharString
                symtype: SymType
                symtabl := Find_Sym_Tab(symtab,v)
                symtype := Get_Sym_Attr(symtabl,v,type)
               Opcode := LdStType[Find_Opcode(symtype)] .StOp
                symdisp := Get_Sym_Attr(symtabl,v,disp)
                I| generate store from register that is the value of r
               Gen_LdSt(symtabl,Opcode,r ,symdisp,true)
            end      || Reg_to_Sym

FIG. 3.14 Routines to load and store, respectively, a variable’s value to or from a register, register
          pair, or quadruple.


            run out of registers, we select one for reuse (we assign this task to A lloc_Reg( )).
            Similarly, instead of storing each value as soon as it has been computed, we can defer
            stores to the end of the basic block, or until we run out of registers. Alternatively, if
            there are more registers needed than available, we could implement Reg_to_Sym( )
            so that it stores each computed quantity as early as it reasonably can, so as to mini­
            mize both the number of stores needed and the number of registers in use at once.
                The last two strategies above can be carried a step further. Namely, we can do
            register allocation for basic blocks in a sequence that allows us to take into account,
62               Symbol-Table Structure


                 procedure Find_Sym_Tab(symtab,v) returns SymTab
                    symtab: in SymTab
                    v: in Var
                 begin
                    symtabl: SymTab
                     II determine correct symbol table for symbol
                     I| and set Depth if neither local nor global
                    Depth := 0
                     if Locate_Sym(symtab,v) then
                        return symtab
                    elif Locate_Sym(GloSymtab,v) then
                        return GloSymtab
                    else
                        symtabl    Encl_Sym_Tab(symtab,v)
                        Depth    Depth_Sym_Tab(symtabl,symtab)
                        return symtabl
                    fi
                 end     || Find_Sym_Tab

                 procedure Find_Opcode(symtype) returns integer
                    symtype: in SymType
                 begin
                    for i := 1 to 11 do
                       if symtype = LdStType[i].type then
                          return i
                       fi
                    od
                 end    || Find_Opcode

     FIG. 3.15 Auxiliary routines used in generating loads and stores.



                 for most blocks, the contents of the registers on entry to the block. If a block has a
                 single predecessor, the register state on entry to it is the exit state of its predecessor. If
                 it has multiple predecessors, the appropriate choice is the intersection of the register
                 states on exit from the predecessors. This allows quite efficient register allocation
                 and minimization of loads and stores for structures such as if- th e n - e ls e s, but
                 it does not help for loops, since one of the predecessors of a loop body is the
                 loop body itself. To do much better than this we need the global register-allocation
                 techniques discussed in Chapter 16, which also discusses the local approach we have
                 just described in more detail.
                       Another alternative is to assign symbolic registers during code generation and
                 leave it to the global register allocator to assign memory locations for those symbolic
                 registers requiring them.
                       It is a relatively easy generalization to generate loads and stores for variables in
                 closed scopes imported into the current scope. Doing so involves adding attributes
                 to each symbol table (not symbol-table entries) to indicate what kind of scope it
                 represents and what register to use (i.e., other than f p and gp) to access the symbols
                 in it.
          Section 3.6        Approaches to Generating Loads and Stores                   63


          procedure Gen.LdSt (symtabl,OpCode,reg,symdisp,stflag)
             symtabl: in SymTab
             OpCode: in CharString
             reg: in Register
             symdisp: in integer
             stflag: in boolean
          begin
             i: integer
             regl, regc: CharString
             if symtabl * GloSymtab then
                 II set regl to base address
                 regl := "gp"
                 regc := Reg.Char(reg)
             else
                 regl := "fp"
                 if stflag then
                    reg := Alloc_Reg_Anon(int,4)
                 fi
                 regc := Reg_Char(reg)
                 I| generate loads to get to the right stack frame
                 for i := 1 to Depth do
                     Gen.Inst("lduw","[" © regl © "+"
                        © StaticLinkOffset ©        © regc)
                     regl := regc
                 od
                 if stflag then
                    Free.Reg(reg)
                 fi
             fi
              I| generate load or store
             if Short_Const(symdisp) & stflag then
                 Gen_Inst(Opcode,regc ©       © regl © "+" © Int_Char(symdisp) © "]");
                 return
             elif Short_Const(symdisp) then
                 Gen.Inst(Opcode,"[" © regl © "+" © Int.Char(symdisp) © "]," © regc);
                 return
             fi
              I| generate sethi and load or store
             Gen_Inst ("sethi","#
                                /,hi(" © Int_Char (symdisp) © ")," ® regl)
             if stflag then
                 Gen.Inst(Opcode,regc © ",[" © regl © "+# /0lo(" © Int_Char(symdisp)
                        © ••)]")
              else
                 Gen_Inst (Opcode," [" © regl © "+°/0lo(" © Int_Char (symdisp) © ")],"
                     © regc)
              fi
           end     |I Gen_LdSt

FIG. 3.15 (continued)
     Symbol-Table Structure


     Wrap-Up
     In this chapter we have been concerned with issues involved in structuring local
     and global symbol tables to accommodate the features of modern programming
     languages and to make them efficient for use in compiled language implementa­
     tions.
          We began with a discussion of storage classes and visibility or scoping rules.
     Next we discussed symbol attributes and how to structure a local symbol table,
     followed by a description of a way to organize a global symbol table that includes
     importing and exporting scopes, so as to support languages like Modula-2, Ada,
     and C++.
          Then we specified a programming interface to global and local symbol tables
     that allows them to be structured in any way one desires, as long as it satisfies
     the interface. Next we explored issues involved in binding variables to storage
     locations and symbolic registers, and we presented ican implementations of routines
     to generate loads and stores for variables in accord with their attributes and the
     symbol-table interface mentioned above.
          The primary lessons in this chapter are (1) that there are many ways to imple­
     ment symbol tables, some more efficient than others, (2) that it is important to make
     operations on symbol tables efficient, (3) that careful thought about the data struc­
     tures used can produce both highly efficient and relatively simple implementations,
     (4) that the structure of the symbol table can be hidden from other parts of a com­
     piler by a sufficiently specified interface, and (5) that there are several approaches
     to generating loads and stores that can be more or less efficient in terms of tracking
     register contents and minimizing memory traffic.




     Further Reading
     The programming language Mesa is described in [MitM79].
          [Knut73] provides a wealth of information and techniques for designing hash
     functions.
          The paper by Graham, Joy, and Roubine on which our scoping model is based
     is [GraJ79].




     Exercises
3.1 Give examples from real programming languages of as many of the following pairs
    of scopes and lifetimes as actually occur. For each, cite the language and give example
    code.
     Section 3.9     Exercises                                                             65


                           Entire       File or       Set of          One             One
                           program      module        procedures      procedure       block
    Entire
    execution
    Execution in
    a module
    All executions
    of a procedure
    Single execution
    of a procedure
    Execution of
    a block
3.2 Write an ican routine S tru c t_ E q u iv (ta l,t n l,t d ) that takes two type names tnl
    and tn l and an ican representation of a set of Pascal type definitions td9 such that
    each of tnl and tn l is either a simple type or one of the types defined in td and returns
    tru e if the types named tnl and tn l are structurally equivalent or f a l s e if they are
    not. td is an ican list of pairs, each of whose members consists of a type name and
    a type representation, where, for example, the type definitions in Figure 3.1(b) are
    represented by the following list:

          [<tl,<array,2,[<0,5>,<1,10>],integer>>,
           <t2,<record,3 ,[<t2a,integer),<t2b,<pointer,t2> >,
                   <t2c,<array,l,[<1,3>],char>>]>>,
           <t3,<array,1,[<1,100>],t2>>]

     Two types are structurally equivalent if (1) they are the same simple type or (2) their
     definitions are identical, except for possibly using different names for types from
     which they are composed. For example, given the Pascal type definitions

         tl = integer;
         t2 = array [1..10] of integer;
         t3 = array [1..10] of tl;
         t4 = record fl: integer; f2: Tt4 end;
         t5 = record fl: tl;       f2: Tt4 end;
         t6 = record fl: t2;       f2: Tt4 end;

     each of the pairs t l and in te g e r, t2 and t3 , and t4 and t5 are structurally
     equivalent, while t6 is inequivalent to all the other types.
3.3 Write routines to assign stack variables to offsets from the frame pointer (a) in the
    order given in the symbol table, (b) ordered by the length of the data, longest first,
    and (c) ordered shortest first.
3.4 Write register-tracking versions of (a) Sym_to_Reg( ), (b) Reg_to_Sym( ), and (c)
    Alloc_Reg( ).
66        Symbol-Table Structure


     3.5 Design an ican symbol-table entry that includes at least the fields described at the be­
         ginning of Section 3.2 and write the routines Get _Sym_Attr( ) andSet_Sym_Attr( )
         in ican .
     3.6 Design a structure for a local symbol table, using your entry design from the preced­
         ing exercise, and write ican implementations of Insert_Sym ( ), Locate_Sym( ),
         Next_Sym( ), and More_Syms( ).
     3.7 Design a structure for a global symbol table, using your local-table design from
         the preceding exercise, and write ican implementations of New_Sym_Tab ( ),
         Dest_Sym_Tab( ), Encl_Sym_Tab( ), and Depth_Sym_Tab( ) that take closed
         scopes into account.
                                                                            CHAPTER 4




                                             Intermediate
                                           Representations




      I
           n this chapter we explore issues involved in the design of intermediate-code
           representations. As we shall see, there are numerous feasible choices for
           intermediate-code structure.
           While we discuss several intermediate-code forms and their relative advantages,
      we shall finally need to select and use a particular intermediate-code design for
      concreteness in our presentation of optimization and code-generation issues. Our
      primary intermediate language is called m ir , for Medium-level Intermediate Repre­
      sentation. In addition, we also describe a somewhat higher-level form called h ir , for
      High-level Intermediate Representation, and a lower-level form called lir , for Low-
      level Intermediate Representation. The basic mir is suitable for most optimizations
      (as is lir ), while hir is used for dependence analysis and some of the code transfor­
      mations based on it, and lir is used for optimizations that require that registers and
      addressing be explicit.


4.1   Issues in Designing an Intermediate Language
      Intermediate-language design is largely an art, not a science. There are several prin­
      ciples that apply and a large body of experience to draw on, but there is always a
      decision about whether to use or adapt an existing representation or, if an existing
      language is not used, there are many decisions to be made in the design of a new one.
      If an existing one is to be used, there are considerations of its appropriateness for the
      new application—both the languages to be compiled and the target architecture—
      and any resulting porting costs, versus the savings inherent in reuse of an existing
      design and code. There is also the issue of whether the intermediate form is appro­
      priate for the kinds and degree of optimization to be performed. Some optimizations
      may be very hard to do at all on a given intermediate representation, and some may
      take much longer to do than they would on another representation. For example,
      the ucode intermediate language, forms of which are used in the pa-risc and mips

                                                                                           67
68   Interm ediate Representations


     compilers, is very well suited to an architecture that evaluates expressions on a stack,
     as that is its model of expression evaluation. It is less well suited a priori to a load-
     store architecture with a large register set instead of an evaluation stack. Thus, both
     Hewlett-Packard’s and m ip s ’s compilers translate u co d e into another form for opti­
     mization. HP translates it to a very low-level representation, while m ips translates it
     within its optimizer to a medium-level triples form, optimizes it, and then translates
     it back to u c o d e for the code generator.
            If a new intermediate representation is to be designed, the issues include its level
     (and, most particularly, how machine-dependent it is), its structure, its expressive­
     ness (i.e., the constructs needed to cover the appropriate range of languages), its
     appropriateness for optimization or for particular optimizations, and its appropri­
     ateness for code generation for the target architecture or architectures.
            There is also the possibility of using more than one intermediate form, trans­
     lating from one to another in the compilation process, either to preserve an existing
     technology investment or to do the tasks appropriate to each level at the correspond­
     ing time (or both), or the possibility of having a multi-level intermediate form. The
     former is what Hewlett-Packard does in their compilers for pa-r isc . They first trans­
     late to a version of u c o d e , which was the intermediate form used for the previous
     generation of H P3000s (for which it was very appropriate, since they were stack ma­
     chines). Then, in two steps, they translate to a very low-level representation called
     s l l ic 1 on which they do virtually all their optimization. It is essential to doing op­
     timization effectively at that level, however, that they preserve information gathered
     about the code in the language-specific front ends and the intermediate stages.
            In the latter approach, some constructs typically have more than one possible
     representation, and each may be appropriate for a particular task. One common ex­
     ample of this is being able to represent subscripted expressions by lists of subscripts
     (a relatively high-level form) and by linearized expressions that make explicit the
     computation of the offset in memory from the base address of the array or another
     element’s address (a lower-level form). The list form is desirable for doing depen­
     dence analysis (see Section 9.1) and the various optimizations based on it, while
     the linearized form is appropriate for constant folding, strength reduction, loop-
     invariant code motion, and other more basic optimizations.
            For example, using the notation described in Section 4.6 below, a use of the C
     expression a [ i ] [j+ 2 ] with the array declared to be

         f l o a t a [2 0 ][1 0 ]

     might be represented in a high-level form (h ir ) as shown in Figure 4.1(a), in a
     medium-level form (m ir ) as shown in Figure 4.1(b), and in a low-level form ( lir )
     as shown in Figure 4.1(c). Use of a variable name in the high-level and medium-level
     forms indicates the symbol-table entry for it, and the unary operators addr and * in
     the medium-level form indicate “ address o f” and pointer indirection, respectively.
     The high-level form indicates that it is a reference to an element of an array with


     1. sllic is an abbreviation for Spectrum Low-Level Intermediate Code. Spectrum was the internal
     name for pa-risc during its development.
            Section 4.2    High-Level Intermediate Languages                                     69


            tl <- a[i,j+2]              tl <- 3 + 2                rl <- [fp-4]
                                        t2 <- i * 20               r2 <r~ rl + 2
                                        t3 <- tl + t2              r3 <r~ [fp-8]
                                        t4 <- 4 * t3               r4 <- r3 * 20
                                        t5 <- addr a               r5 <- r4 + r2
                                        t6 <- t5 + t4              r6 <- 4 * r5
                                        t7 <7- *t6                 r7     fp - 216
                                                                   fl     [r7+r6]
            (a)                         (b)                        (c)
 FIG. 4.1   (a) High-, (b) medium-, and (c) low-level representations of a C array reference.

            two subscripts, the first of which is i and the second of which is the expression
            j + 2. The medium-level form computes
                  (addr a) + 4 * ( i * 20 + j + 2)
            as the address of the array element and then loads the value with that address into
            the temporary t7 . The low-level form fetches the values of i and j from memory
            (assumed to be at offsets -4 and -8, respectively, from the contents of the frame
            pointer register f p), computes the offset into the array, and then fetches the value of
            the array element into floating-point register f 1.
                 Note that intermediate codes are typically represented within a compiler in a
            binary form and symbols, such as variables, are usually pointers to symbol-table
            entries, so as to achieve both speed and compactness. In our examples, we use
            external text representations designed for readability. Most compilers include a
            debugging output form of their intermediate code(s), at least for the benefit of the
            compiler writers. In some cases, such as in compilers that save intermediate code
            to enable cross-module procedure integration (see Section 15.2), there needs to be
            a form that not only can be printed out for debugging, but that can also be read
            back in and used. The three main issues encountered in designing such an external
            representation are (1) how to represent pointers in a position-independent way in the
            external form; (2) how to represent compiler-generated objects, such as temporaries,
            in a way that makes them unique to the module in which they appear; and (3) how
            to make the external representation both compact and fast to write and read. One
            possibility is to use two external representations—a character-based one for human
            consumption (and, possibly, human generation) and a binary one to support cross­
            module procedure integration and other interprocedural analyses and optimizations.
            In the binary form, pointers can be made position-independent by making them
            relative to the locations of the pointer references. To make each temporary unique
            to the module that uses it, it can be made to include the module name.


.2          High-Level Intermediate Languages
            High-level intermediate languages (ILs) are used almost entirely in the earliest stages
            of the compilation process, or in preprocessors before compilation. In the former
            case, they are produced by compiler front ends and are usually transformed shortly
70              In term ediate R epresen tation s


                in t f ( a ,b )
                in t a , b;
                {    in t c ;
                     c = a + 2;
                     p r in t ( b ,c ) ;
                }
     FIG. 4.2   A tiny C routine whose abstract syntax tree is given in Figure 4.3.


                                           function



                ident     paramlist                               body
                    f



                        ident paramlist               decllist           stmtlist




                              ident        end   ident      end                       stmtlist
                                b                  c




     FIG. 4.3   Abstract syntax tree for the C routine in Figure 4.2.


                thereafter into lower-level form s; in the latter, they are often transform ed back into
                source code in the original language or another language.
                     One frequently occurring form o f high-level IL is the abstract syntax tree, which
                m akes explicit the structure o f a program , usually with just enough information
                available to reconstruct its source form or a close facsimile thereof. A m ajor use
                for abstract syntax trees is in language-sensitive or syntax-directed editors for pro­
                gram m ing languages, in which they usually are the standard internal representation
                for program s. As an exam ple, consider the simple C routine in Figure 4.2 and its ab ­
                stract syntax tree representation in Figure 4.3. The tree, along with a symbol table
Section 4.4    Low-Level Intermediate Languages                                     71


indicating the types of the variables, provides all the information necessary to recon­
struct the source (except information about the details of its layout, which could be
included as annotations in the tree if desired).
     A single tree traversal by a compiler component that is knowledgeable about the
semantics of the source language is all that is necessary to transform the abstract
syntax tree into a medium-level intermediate-code representation, such as those
discussed in the next section.
     Another form of high-level IL is one that is designed for dependence analysis,
as discussed in Section 9.1. Such an IL is usually linear, rather than tree-like, but
preserves some of the features of the source language, such as array subscripts
and loop structure, in essentially their source forms. Our hir described below in
Section 4.6.2 has high-level features of this sort, but also includes many medium-
level features.


Medium-Level Intermediate Languages
Medium-level intermediate languages are generally designed to reflect the range of
features in a set of source languages, but in a language-independent way, and are
designed to be good bases for generation of efficient machine code for one or more
architectures. They provide a way to represent source variables, temporaries, and
registers; to reduce control flow to simple conditional and unconditional branches,
calls, and returns; and to make explicit the operations necessary to support block
structure and procedures.
     Our mir (Section 4.6.1) and Sun IR (Section 21.1) are both good examples of
medium-level ILs.
     Medium-level ILs are appropriate for most of the optimizations done in com­
pilers, such as common-subexpression elimination (Section 13.1), code motion (Sec­
tion 13.2), and algebraic simplification (Section 12.3).


Low-Level Intermediate Languages
Low-level intermediate languages frequently correspond almost one-to-one to target-
machine instructions and, hence, are often quite architecture-dependent. They devi­
ate from one-to-one correspondence generally in cases where there are alternatives
for the most effective code to generate for them. For example, a low-level interme­
diate language may have an integer multiply operator, while the target architecture
may not have a multiply instruction, or the multiply instruction may not be the best
choice of code to generate for some combinations of operands. Or, the intermediate
code may have only simple addressing modes, such as register + register and regis­
ter + constant, while the target architecture has more complex ones, such as scaled
indexing or index register modification. In either case, it becomes the function of
the final instruction-selection phase of the compilation process or of a postpass opti­
mizer to select the appropriate instruction or instruction sequence to generate from
the intermediate code. The use of such representations allows maximal optimization
to be performed on the intermediate code and in the final phases of compilation,
72              Intermediate Representations


                     t2        <—    *tl
                     tl        <- t l           +   4

                       CO to
                                       CO CO
                                    ■p ■p
                               <-              +    1
                     • -p -p   <-              V    c+
                               LO
                      if       ■P    goto L I



                     LDWM                      4(0,r2),r3   Ll:   LDWX    r2(0,rl),r3

                     ADDI                      1,r4,r4            ADDIB,< 4,r2,L1
                     COMB,<                    r4,r5,Ll
                                                            (c)
     FIG. 4.4 A mir fragment in (a) with alternative pa-risc code sequences generated for it in (b)
              and (c).


                to either expand intermediate-code instructions into code sequences or to combine
                related ones into more powerful instructions.
                     For example, suppose the target architecture has a load instruction that option­
                ally updates the base address used to fetch the data in parallel with fetching it, but
                that doing such an update fails to set the machine’s condition codes or does not al­
                low for its use in an add and (conditional) branch instruction, and so it cannot be
                used to count the containing loop. We then have available the possibility of combin­
                ing intermediate-code instructions that fetch the data and increment the data address
                into a fetch with increment. On the other hand, if the loop control variable has been
                determined to be an induction variable and eliminated, we might need to keep the
                address update separate from the data fetch to use it to test for termination of the
                loop. An example of this is shown in Figure 4.4. The mir in Figure 4.4(a) separately
                loads the data, increments the address loaded from, increments the loop counter,
                tests for completion of the loop, and branches based on the result of the test. The
                operands are temporaries and constants. The pa-risc code in Figure 4.4(b) does a
                load word with modify that updates the address in r2 to point to the next array el­
                ement, then does an add immediate to increment the loop counter, and a compare
                and branch to close the loop. The alternative code in Figure 4.4(c) does a load word
                indexed to access the data, and an add immediate and branch to update the address
                and close the loop.



4.5             Multi-Level Intermediate Languages
                Some of the intermediate languages we consider include features that are best viewed
                as representing multiple levels in the same language. For example, the medium-level
                Sun IR has some high-level features, such as a way to represent multiply subscripted
                array references with the multiple subscripts, as well as with the several subscripts
                linearized to a single offset. The former representation is valuable for some varieties
Section 4.6    Our Intermediate Languages: MIR, HIR, and LIR                         73


of dependence analysis (see Section 9.3) and hence valuable to vectorization, paral­
lelization, and data-cache optimizations, while the latter form is more susceptible to
the traditional loop optimizations.
     At the other end of the spectrum, the low-level sllic includes integer multiply
and divide operators, despite the fact that no pa-risc hardware includes an integer
multiply instruction that operates on integer registers (although pa-risc i .i does
provide one that operates on integers held in floating-point registers) or any integer
divide instruction at all. This provides the opportunity to do optimizations (such as
algebraic simplifications and strength reductions) that depend on recognizing that
a multiplication or division is being performed and thus allows the module that
generates the final code to determine that a particular multiplication, for example,
can be done most efficiently using shift and add instructions, rather than by the
hardware multiply.



Our Intermediate Languages: MIR, HIR, and LIR
In most of our examples expressed in an intermediate language from here on we
use a language called mir (Medium-level Intermediate Representation, pronounced
“ meer” ), which we describe next. Where appropriate we use an enhanced version
of mir called hir (High-level Intermediate Representation, pronounced “ heer” ),
with some higher-level features, such as representing subscripted references to array
elements by lists, rather than by linear expressions representing offsets from the base
of the array. Correspondingly, where appropriate we use an adaptation of mir called
lir (Low-level Intermediate Representation, pronounced “ leer” ), when lower-level
features, such as explicit representation of registers, memory addresses, and the like
are appropriate. On occasion we mix features of mir and hir or mir and lir in the
same program to make a specific point or to represent a stage in the translation from
one level to the next.


Medium-Level Intermediate Representation (MIR)
Basically mir consists of a symbol table and quadruples consisting of an operator
and three operands, plus a few additional operators that have fewer or more than
three operands. A few categories of special symbols are reserved to denote temporary
variables, registers, and labels. We write mir instructions, wherever it is appropriate,
as assignments, using          as the assignment operator. We use the xbnf notation
described in Section 2.1 to present the syntax of mir and the other intermediate
languages, hir and lir , that are defined below.
    We begin our description of mir by giving the syntax of programs in xb n f ,
which appears in Table 4.1. A program consists of a sequence of program units.
Each program unit consists of an optional label, followed by a sequence of (possibly
labeled) instructions delimited by begin and end.
    Next, we give the syntax of mir instructions in Table 4.2, which implicitly
declares the ican type MIRInst, and describe their semantics. A mir instruction may
74              Intermediate Representations


 T A B LE 4.1   xbnf syntax of mir programs and program units.

                P ro g ra m           —►   [L a b e l :] P ro g U n it*
                P ro g U n it              [L a b e l :] begin M IR In sts end
                M IR In sts                {[L a b e l :] M IR In st [I 1 C o m m en t]]*
                L abel                     Iden tifier


 T A B LE 4.2   xbnf syntax of mir instructions.

                M IR In st                       R e ce iv e ln st | A ssig n ln st | G o to ln st \ I fln st \ C a llln st
                                                 | R e tu rn ln st \ S eq u e n c eln st \ L a b e l : M IR In st
                R e ce iv e ln st                receive V arN am e ( P aram T y p e )
                A ssig n ln st                   V arN am e < - E x p re ssio n
                                                 | V arN am e < - ( V arN am e ) O p e ra n d
                                                 | [*] V arN am e [. E ltN a m e ] <- O p e ran d
                G o to ln st                     goto L a b e l
                I fln st                         if R e lE x p r {goto L a b e l | trap Integer]
                C a llln st                      [call | V arN am e <-] P ro c N a m e , A r g L ist
                A r g L ist                      ( [{O p e ra n d , T y p eN am e] x ;] )
                R e tu rn ln st                  return [O p e ra n d ]
                S eq u e n c eln st              sequence
                E x p re ssio n                  O p e ra n d B in O p e r O p e ra n d
                                                 | U n ary O p e r O p e ra n d \ O p e r a n d
                R e lE x p r                     O p e ra n d R e lO p e r O p e ra n d | [! ] O p e r a n d
                O p e ra n d                     V arN am e \ C o n st
                B in O p e r                     + | - |* |/ |mod |min |max | R e lO p e r
                                                 |shl |shr |shra |and |or |xor | . |*.
                R e lO p e r                     = 1!=l <I<-I>l >-
                U n ary O p er                   - | ! | addr | ( T y p eN am e ) | *
                C o n st                         In teger \ E lo a tN u m b e r \ B o o le a n
                In teger                         0 | [-] N Z D e c D ig it D e c D ig it* \ Ox H e x D ig it+
                E lo a tN u m b e r              [-] D e c D ig it+ . D e c D ig it f [E [-] D e c D ig it+ ] [D]
                B o o le a n                     true |false
                L ab el                          Iden tifier
                V arN am e                       Iden tifier
                E ltN a m e                      Iden tifier
                P ara m T y p e                  val |res |valres |ref
                Id en tifier                     L ette r {L ette r \ D ig it | _)*
                L ette r                         a |... |z |A |... |Z
                N Z D e c D ig it                1|2|3|4|5|6|7|8|9
                D e c D ig it                    0 | N Z D e c D ig it
                H e x D ig it                    D e c D ig it \ a | ... | f | A | ... | F
            Section 4.6              Our Intermediate Languages: MIR, HIR, and LIR                      75


            be a r e c e iv e , an assignment, a go to , an i f , a call, a re tu rn , or a sequence, and it
            may be labeled.
                 A receive specifies the reception of a parameter from a calling routine. Receives
            may appear only as the first executable instructions in a program. The instruction
            specifies the parameter and the parameter-passing discipline used, namely, value
            (v al), result (re s), value-result (v a lr e s), or reference (re f).
                 An assignment either computes an expression and assigns its value to a variable,
            conditionally assigns the value of an operand to a variable, or assigns a value through
            a pointer or to a component of a structure. The target of the first two types of
            assignments is a variable. In a conditional assignment, the value of the variable in
            parentheses after the arrow must be Boolean, and the assignment is performed only if
            its value is tru e . An expression may consist of two operands combined by a binary
            operator, a unary operator followed by an operand, or just an operand. A binary
            operator may be any of the arithmetic operators

                 +     -        *    /    mod   min   max

            or the relational operators
                 =     ! = < < = > > =

            or the shift and logical operators

                 shl           shr       shra   and   or    xor

            or the component-selection operators

                       *   .
            A unary operator may be any of the symbols shown in Table 4.3.
                 The target of the second type of assignment is composed of an optional indirec­
            tion operator       (which indicates assignment through a pointer), a variable name,
            and an optional component selection operator (“ . ” followed by a member name of
            the given structure). It can be used to assign a value to an object accessed by means
            of a pointer, or to a component of a structure, or to an object that is both.
                 A goto instruction causes a transfer of control to the instruction labeled by its
            target, which must be in the current procedure. An i f instruction tests a relation
            or a condition or its negation and, if it is satisfied, causes a transfer of control. The
            transfer of control may be either identical to that caused by a go to instruction or


TABLE 4.3 Unary operators in m ir .

            Symbol                    Meaning

            -                         Arithmetic minus
             !                        Logical negation
            addr                      Address of
            (TypeName)                Type conversion
            *                         Pointer indirection
76   Intermediate Representations


     may be to an underlying run-time system (a “ trap” ). In the latter case, it specifies an
     integer trap number.
          A call instruction gives the name of the procedure being called and a list of actual
     arguments and may specify a variable to be assigned the result of the call (if there is
     one). It causes the named procedure to be invoked with the arguments given and, if
     appropriate, the returned value to be assigned to the variable.
           A retu rn specifies execution of a return to the procedure that invoked the
     current one and may include an operand whose value is returned to the caller.
           A sequence instruction represents a barrier in the intermediate code. Instruc­
     tions with one or more operands with the v o la t i le storage class modifier must not
     be moved across a sequence instruction, either forward or backward. This restricts
     the optimizations that can be performed on code that contains such instructions.
           Identifiers consist of a letter followed by a sequence of zero or more letters, dig­
     its, or underscores. The name of a variable, type, or procedure may be any identifier,
     except those reserved for labels, temporaries, and symbolic registers, as described
     next. Identifiers consisting of an uppercase “L” followed by a non-negative decimal
     integer, e.g., LO, L32, and L7701, denote labels. For the names of temporaries, we
     reserve names consisting of a lowercase “t” followed by a non-negative decimal in­
     teger, e.g., tO, t32, and t7701. For symbolic registers, we reserve names consisting
     of a lowercase “ s ” followed by a non-negative decimal integer, and for real registers
     we reserve rO, ... ,r31 and f 0, ... ,f 31.
           Integer constants may be in either decimal or hexadecimal notation. A decimal
     integer is either “ 0” or consists of an optional minus sign followed by a nonzero dec­
     imal digit, followed by zero or more decimal digits. A hexadecimal integer consists
     of “ Ox” followed by a sequence of hexadecimal digits, where a hexadecimal digit is
     either a decimal digit, any of the uppercase letters “ A” through “ F” , or the lowercase
     letters “ a ” through “ f ” . For example, the following are all legal integers:
         0      1     3462     -2     -49   0x0    0xl37A      0x2ffffffc
     In a floating-point number, the part beginning with “E” indicates that the preceding
     value is to be multiplied by 10 to the value of the integer following the “E”,and the
     optional “D” indicates a double-precision value. Thus, for example,
         0.0        3.2E10     -0.5     -2.0E-22
     are all single-precision floating-point numbers, and
         0.0D       3.2E102D        -0.5D   -2.0E-22D
     are all double-precision floating-point numbers.
          Comments in mir programs begin with the characters “ I I ” and run to the end
     of the current line.
          We use full mir programs where appropriate, but most of the time we use only
     fragments, since they are enough to satisfy our needs.
          As an example of m ir , the pair of C procedures in Figure 4.5 corresponds to the
     code in Figure 4.6.
          Note that some of the operators in m ir , such as min and max, are not generally
     included in machine instruction sets. We include them in our intermediate code be­
     cause they occur frequently in higher-level languages and some architectures provide
             Section 4.6       Our Intermediate Languages: MIR, HIR, and LIR   77

             void make_node(p,n)
                struct node *p;
                int n;
             { struct node *q;
                q = malloc(sizeof(struct node));
                q->next = nil;
                q->value = n;
                p->next = q;
             >

             void insert_node(n,l)
                int n;
                struct node *1;
             { if (n > l->value)
                   if (l->next == nil) make_node(l,n);
                   else insert_node(n,l->next);
             >

FIG . 4 .5   Exam ple pair of C procedures.


                 make_node:
                    begin
                        receive p(val)
                        receive n(val)
                        q <- call malloc,(8,int)
                        *q.next <- nil
                        *q.value <- n
                        *p.next <- q
                        return
                    end
                 insert_node:
                    begin
                        receive n(val)
                        receive l(val)
                       tl <- 1*.value
                        if n <= tl goto LI
                        t2 <- l*.next
                        if t2 != nil goto L2
                        call make_node(1,type1;n,int)
                        return
             L2:       t4 <- l*.next
                        call insert_node,(n,int;t4,typel)
                        return
             LI:       return
                    end

FIG . 4 .6   m ir   code for the pair of C procedures in Figure 4.5.
78      Interm ediate Representations


        ways to compute them very efficiently and, in particular, without any branches. For
        example, for pa-risc , the mir instruction tl  t2 min t3 can be translated (assum­
        ing that t i is in register ri) to 2
            MOVE        r2,rl     /* copy r2 to       rl */
            C0M,>=      r3,r2     /* compare r3       to r2, nullify next if >= */
            MOVE        r3,rl     /* copy r3 to       rl if not nullified */

            Also, note that we have provided two ways to represent conditional tests and
        branches: either (1) by computing the value of a condition and then branching based
        on it or its negation, e.g.,
            t3 <- tl < t2
            if t3 goto LI

        or (2) by computing the condition and branching in the same mir instruction, e.g.,
            if tl < t2 goto LI

        The former approach is well suited to an architecture with condition codes, such
        as sparc, power , or the Intel 386 architecture family. For such machines, the
        comparison can sometimes be subsumed by a previous subtract instruction, since
        t l < t 2 if and only if 0 < t 2 - t l , and it may be desirable to move the compare
        or subtract away from the conditional branch to allow the condition codes to be
        determined in time to know whether the branch will be taken or not. The latter
        approach is well suited to an architecture with compare and branch instructions,
        such as pa-risc or m ips , since the mir instruction can usually be translated to a
        single machine instruction.

4.6.2   High-Level Intermediate Representation (HIR)
        In this section we describe the extensions to mir that make it into the higher-level
        intermediate representation hir .
              An array element may be referenced with multiple subscripts and with its sub­
        scripts represented explicitly in hir . Arrays are stored in row-major order, i.e., with
        the last subscript varying fastest. We also include a high-level looping construct, the
        f o r loop, and a compound i f . Thus, M IRInst needs to be replaced by H IR Inst, and
        the syntax of A ssignlnst, Traplnst, and O perand need to be changed as shown in
        Table 4.4. An IntExpr is any expression whose value is an integer.
              The semantics of the f o r loop are similar to those of Fortran’s do, rather than
        C ’s f o r statement. In particular, the meaning of the hir f o r loop in Figure 4.7(a) is
        given by the mir code in Figure 4.7(b), with the additional proviso that the body of
        the loop must not change the value of the control variable v. Note that Figure 4.7(b)
        selects one or the other loop body (beginning with LI or L2), depending on whether
        opd2 > 0 or not.

        2. The MOVE and COMopcodes are both pseudo-ops, not actual pa -risc instructions. MOVE can be
        implemented as an ADDor ORand COMas a COMCLR.
              Section 4.6          Our Intermediate Languages: MIR, HIR, and LIR                     79


 TABLE 4.4 Changes to xbnf description of instructions and operands to turn mir into h ir .

              HIRInst                 *     Assignlnst \ Gotolnst \ Iflnst \ Calllnst \ Returnlnst
                                            | Receivelnst \ Sequencelnst \ Forlnst \ Iflnst
                                            | Traplnst \ Label : HIRInst
              Forlnst                       for VarName <- Operand [by Operand] to Operand do
                                            HIRInst* endfor
              Iflnst               —>       if RelExpr then HIRInst* [else HIRInst*] endif
              Assignlnst                    [VarName | Array Ref] <- Expression
                                            | [*] VarName [. EltName] <r- Operand
              Traplnst             —►       trap Integer
              Operand                       VarName \ Array Ref \ Const
              ArrayRef             —►       VarName [ {Subscript x ,} ]
              Subscript            —►       IntExpr




                                                                  v <- opdl
                                                                  t2 < - opd2
                                                                  t3 <- opd3
                                                                  if t2 > 0 goto L2
                                                              LI: if v < t3 goto L3
              for v <- opdl by opd2 to opd3                         instructions
                    instructions                                  v <- v + t2
              endfor                                              goto LI
                                                              L2: if v > t3 goto L3
                                                                     instructions
                                                                    v <- v + t2
                                                                    goto L2
                                                              L3:

              (a)                                             (b)
   FIG. 4.7   (a) Form of the hir fo r loop, and (b) its semantics in m ir .



4.6.3         Low-Level Intermediate Representation (LIR)
              In this section we describe the changes to m ir that make it into the lower-level inter­
              mediate code l ir . We give only the necessary changes to the syntax and semantics
              of m ir by providing replacements for productions in the syntax of m ir (and addi­
              tional ones, as needed) and descriptions of the additional features. The changes to
              the x b n f description are as shown in Table 4.5. Assignments and operands need
              to be changed to replace variable names by registers and memory addresses. Calls
              need to be changed to delete the argument list, since we assume that parameters are
80             Interm ediate Representations


 TABLE 4.5 Changes in the xbnf description of mir instructions and expressions to create lir .

               LIRInst                      RegAsgnlnst \ CondAsgnlnst \ Storelnst \ Loadlnst
                                            | Gotolnst | Iflnst \ Calllnst \ReturnInst
                                            | Sequencelnst | Label: LIRInst
               RegAsgnlnst                  RegName <- Expression
                                            | RegName ( Integer , Integer ) <- Operand
               CondAsgnlnst                 RegName <- ( RegName ) Operand
               Storelnst                     MemAddr [ ( Length ) ] <- Operand
               Loadlnst                     RegName <- MemAddr [ ( Length ) ]
               Gotolnst                     goto {Label \ RegName [{+ | -} Zwteg^r]}
               Calllnst                     [RegName <-] c a ll {ProcName \ RegName] , RegName
               Operand                      RegName \ Integer
               MemAddr                      [ RegName ] [( Length )]
                                            | [ RegName + RegName ] [ ( Length ) ]
                                            | [ RegName [+ | -] Integer ] [ ( Length ) ]
               Length                       Integer




               passed in the run-time stack or in registers (or, if there are more than a predetermined
               number of parameters, the excess ones are also passed in the run-time stack).
                   There are five types of assignment instructions, namely, those that


          1.   assign an expression to a register;
          2.   assign an operand to an element of a register (in lir , the element is represented
               by two integers, namely, the first bit position and the width in bits of the element
               separated by a comma and enclosed in parentheses);
          3.   conditionally assign an operand to a register depending on the value in a register;
          4.   store an operand at a memory address; or
          5.   load a register from a memory address.


               A memory address is given in square brackets (“ [ ” and “ ] ” ) as the contents of a
               register, the sum of the contents of two registers, or a register’s contents plus or minus
               an integer constant. The length specification, if it appears, is an integer number of
               bytes.
                    In a c a l l instruction that has two or more register operands, the next to last
               contains the address to be branched to and the last names the register to be used to
               store the return address, which is the address of the c a l l instruction.
     Section 4.7     Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN                                    81


         For the names of registers, we reserve rO, r l , . . . , r31 for integer or general-
     purpose registers, fO, f 1, . . . , f31 for floating-point registers, and sO, s i , . . . for
     symbolic registers.



     Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN
     So as to be able to conveniently manipulate m ir , hir , and lir code in ican programs,
     we next discuss a means of representing the former in the latter, which constitutes
     the definition of the ican types MIRInst, HIRInst, L IR Inst, and a series of others.
     This representation can be thought of as an internal form, i.e., ican structures,
     corresponding to the external printed forms of the intermediate representations that
     are defined in the preceding section.
          We begin with Table 4.6, which gives, for each intermediate-language operator
     (including the ones that represent operations that are thought of as applying to the
     left-hand side in an assignment), its representation by an element of the enumerated
     type IROper and its synonym Operator, which are defined as follows:

         IROper = O perator = enum {
                     add,        sub,         mul,        div,        mod,        min,
                     max,        eql,         neql,       less,       lseq,       grtr,
                     gteq,       shl,         shr,        shr a,      and,        or,
                     xor,        ind,         elt,        indelt,     neg,        not,
                     addr,       val,         cast,       lind,       lcond,      1indelt,
                     le lt}

        Next we define the ican types Var, Const, R e g iste r, Symbol, Operand, and
     LIROperand.

         Var = C harString
         Const = C harString
         R e g iste r = C harString
         Symbol = Var u Const
         Operand = Var u Const u TypeName
         LIROperand = R e g iste r u Const u TypeName

     Actually, each type is a subset of the type it is declared to be. In particular:

1.   A member of Var is a quoted sequence of alphanumeric characters and underscores,
     the first of which must be a letter. Temporaries are variables that begin with a
     lowercase “ t ” and follow it by a sequence of one or more decimal digits. Symbols
     that begin with one of “ s ” , “ r ” , or “ f ” followed by one or more decimal digits
     denote registers and are not members of Var.
2.   A member of Const is an integer or a floating-point number, and a member of
     In teger is an integer.
82             Interm ediate Representations


 TABLE 4.6 Names of mir , hir , and lir operators as members of the ican
           enumerated type IROper.

               Intermediate-                                   Intermediate-
               Code             ICAN                           Code            ICAN
               Operator         Identifier                     Operator        Identifier

               +                add                            - (binary)      sub
               * (binary)       mul                            /               div
               mod              mod                            min             min
               max              max                            =               eql
               !=               neql                           <               le s s
               <=               lse q                          >               g rtr
               >=               g t eq                         shl             shl
               shr              shr                            shra            shra
               and              and                            or              or
               xor              xor                            * (unary)       ind
                                e lt                           *.              indelt
               - (unary)        neg                            j               not
               addr             addr                           (none)          val
               (type cast)      cast

                               Intermediate-Code                ICAN
                               Operator                         Identifier

                               (indirect assignment)            lin d
                               (conditional assignment)         lcond
                               (indirect element assignment)    lin d e lt
                               (element assignment)             le lt



          3.   A Register is a symbol that begins with one of “s”, “r”,or “ f ” followed by one or
               more decimal digits. Symbolic registers begin with “s”, integer registers with “r”,
               and floating-point registers with “ f

                   The remaining parts of the representation of the intermediate codes in ican
               depend on the particular intermediate code— m ir , h ir , or lir — so we divide up the
               presentation into the following three subsections. First we define Instruction to be

                     Instruction = HIRInst u MIRInst u LIRInst


4.7.1          Representing MIR in ICAN
               We represent each kind of m ir instruction by an ican tuple, as shown in Table 4.7,
               which implicitly declares the type MIRInst. The enumerated types MIRKind,
            Section 4.7        Representing M IR, HIR, and LIR in ICA N                                             83


TABLE 4.7   mir instructions represented as ican tuples.

            Label:
                 <kind: l a b e l , l b l : Labels
            re ceiv e VarName (ParamType)
                   <kind: r e c e iv e , l e f t : VarName, p ty p e: ParamType>
            VarName <- Operandl Binop Operand2
                 <kind: b in asg n , l e f t : VarName, o p r: Binop, o p d l: O peran dl, opd2: Operandl >
            VarName <- Unop Operand
                 <kind: unasgn, l e f t : VarName, o p r: Unop, opd: Operand>
            VarName     Operand
                 <kind: v a la sg n , l e f t : VarName, opd: Operand>
            VarNamel < - (VarNam e!) Operand
                 <kind: condasgn, l e f t : V arNam el, cond: VarName2, opd: Operand>
            VarName <- (TypeName) Operand
                 <kind: c a s ta s g n , l e f t : VarName, ty p e : TypeName, opd: Operand>
            * VarName <- Operand
                  <kind: in d asgn , l e f t : VarName, opd: Operand>
            VarName. EltName <- Operand
                 <kind: e lt a s g n , l e f t : VarName, e l t : EltNam e, opd: Operand>
            * VarName. EltName <- Operand
                  <kind: in d e lta sg n , l e f t : VarName, e l t : EltN am e, opd: Operand>
            goto Label
                 <kind: g o to , l b l : Label>
            i f Operandl Binop Operandl goto Label
                  <kind: b i n i f , o p r: Binop, o p d l: O peran dl, opd2: O peran dl, l b l : Label>
            i f Unop Operand goto Label
                  <kind: u n i f , o p r: Unop, opd: Operand, l b l : Label>
            i f Operand goto Label
                  <kind: v a l i f , o p r: Operand, l b l : Label>
            i f Operandl Binop Operandl tra p Integer
                  <kind: b in tr a p , o p r: Binop, o p d l: O peran dl, opd2: O peran dl, tra p n o : Integer>
            i f Unop Operand tra p Integer
                  <kind: u n trap , o p r: Unop, opd: Operand, tra p n o : Integer>
            i f Operand tra p Integer
                  <kind: v a lt r a p , o p r: Operand, tra p n o : Integer>
            c a l l ProcName, (O p d l, T N I ; ...; O pdn, TNn)
                     < k in d :c a ll,p r o c : ProcName,a r g s : ViOpdl ,T N l> ,...,< O p d « ,T N « > ] >

                                                                                                            (continued)
84             In term ed iate R e p re se n ta tio n s


 T A BLE 4.7   (continued)

               VarName <-ProcNam e, ( O p d l, T N I ; ...; O pdn, TNn)
                    <kind: c a l l a s g n , l e f t : VarName, p ro c : ProcName,
                      a r g s : [< O p d l, TN I > ,..., iO p d n , TN «>] >
               retu rn
                     <kind: re tu rn )
               re tu rn Operand
                      <kind: r e t v a l , opd: Operand>
               sequence
                    <kind:sequence)
               VarName
                    <kind: v a r , v a l : VarName>
               Const (includes Integer)
                     <kind: c o n s t, v a l : Const>
               TNi
                      p ty p e: TNi



               OpdKind, and ExpK ind and the functions Exp_K in d( ) and H a s_ L e ft ( ) are defined
               in Figure 4 .8 .
                      Exp_K ind(& ) indicates whether a M IR instruction o f k in d k contains a bi­
               nary expression , a unary expression , a list o f expression s, or no expression, and
               H a s .L e f t ( k ) returns t r u e if a m ir instruction o f k in d k has a l e f t field and f a l s e
               otherwise. From here until we begin to need the basic-block structure o f procedures
               in C hapter 12, we represent sequences o f interm ediate-code instructions by the array
               I n s t [1 • • n\ for som e « , which is declared as

                     In st: array          [1 ••« ]    of In str u c tio n

               For exam ple, the m i r instruction sequence

                     L I:      b <r- a
                               c <- b + 1

               is represented by the array o f tuples

                     I n s t [1] = < k in d : l a b e l , l b l : " L I ">
                     I n s t [2] = < k i n d : v a l a s g n , l e f t : ,,b " ,o p d : < k in d : v a r , v a l : " a "> >
                     I n s t [3] = < k i n d r b i n a s g n , l e f t : ,,c " , o p r : a d d ,
                                    o p d l : < k in d : v a r , v a l : " b " > , o p d 2 : < k in d : c o n s t , v a l :1> >

                    A s a larger exam ple, Figure 4 .9 sh ow s the m i r code for the body o f the second
               p rogram unit, labeled “ i n s e r t . n o d e ” , in Figure 4 .6 represented as i c a n tuples.
            Section 4.7         Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN                              85


            MIRKind = enum {
                label,      receive, binasgn, unasgn, valasgn,
                condasgn, castasgn, indasgn, eltasgn, indeltasgn,
                goto,     binif,     unif,   valif,    bintrap,
                untrap,   valtrap, call,     callasgn, return,
                retval,    sequence}

            OpdKind = enum {var,const,type}
            ExpKind = enum {binexp,unexp,noexp,listexp}
            Exp_Kind: MIRKind — > ExpKind
            Has_Left: MIRKind — > boolean

            Exp_Kind := {
                <label,noexp>,      <receive,noexp>,                     <binasgn,binexp>,
                <unasgn,unexp),     <valasgn,unexp),                     <condasgn,unexp),
                <castasgn,unexp>,   <indasgn,unexp),                     <eltasgn,unexp),
                <indeltasgn,unexp), <goto,noexp>,                        <binif,binexp),
                <unif,unexp),       <valif,unexp),                       <bintrap,binexp),
                <untrap,unexp),     <valtrap,unexp),                     <call,listexp>,
                <callasgn,listexp>, <return,noexp>,                      <retval,unexp),
                <sequence,noexp>}

            Has_Left := {
                < l a b e l ,f a ls e ) ,  < re ceive,tru e> ,          <binasgn,true >,
                <u n asgn ,tru e),         <v a la sg n ,tru e ),       <condasgn, true >,
                <c a sta sg n ,tru e ),    <in d asgn ,tru e ),         <e lta sg n ,tru e ),
                <in d e lta sg n ,tru e ), < g o t o ,fa ls e ),        < b in if ,f a ls e ) ,
                < u n if,fa ls e ),        <v a l i f , f a l s e ) ,   < b in tr a p ,fa ls e ),
                <u n tr a p ,fa lse ),     <v a lt r a p ,f a ls e )    < c a l l ,f a l s e ) ,
                <c a lla sg n ,tru e ),    < r e tu r n ,fa ls e ),     < r e t v a l,f a ls e ),
                <sequ en ce,false)}
  FIG. 4.8 Types and functions used to determine properties of mir instructions.



                Note that the TN i occurring in the argument list of a c a l l or c a l l a s g n in­
            struction are type names: a pair (O p d i,T N i> indicates the value and type of the /th
            argument.


.7.2        Representing HIR in ICAN
            To represent hir in ican , we proceed essentially as for mir . Table 4.8 shows the
            correspondence between hir instructions and ican tuples and implicitly declares the
            type HIRInst. hir needs no additional operators, so we use IROper to represent
            the type of its operands.
                 The enumerated types HIRKind, HIROpdKind, and HIRExpKind and the functions
            HIR_Exp_Kind( ) and HIR_Has_Left ( ) are somewhat different from the ones for
86                In te rm e d ia te R e p re se n ta tio n s


                  Inst [1]          <kind:receive,left:"n",ptype:val>
                  Inst [2]          <kind:receive,left:"1",ptype:val>
                  Inst [3]          <kind:binasgn,left:"tl",opr:indelt,
                                     opdl:<kind:var,val:1>,
                                     opd2:<kind:const,val:"value">>
                  Inst[4]           <kind:binif,opr:lseq,opdl:<kind:var,val:"n">,
                                     opd2:<kind:var,val:"tl">,lbl:"Ll">
                  Inst [5]          <kind:binasgn,left:"t2",opr:indelt,
                                     opdl:<kind:var,val:1>,
                                     opd2:<kind:const,val:"value"> >
                  Inst [6]          <kind:if,opr:neql,opdl:<kind:var,val:"t2">,
                                     opd2:<kind:const,val:nil),lbl:"L2">
                  Inst [7]        : <kind:call,proc:"make_node",
                                     args:[<<kind:var,val:"t3">,ptype:typel),
                                    <<kind:var,val:"n">,ptype:int>]>
                  Inst[8]           <kind:return)
                  Inst [9]        <kind:label,lbl:"L2">
                  Inst [10]         <kind:binasgn,left:"t4",opr:indelt,
                                     opdl:<kind:var,val:"1">,
                                     opd2:<kind:const,val:"next"> >
                  Inst[11]          <kind:call,proc:"insert_node",
                                     args:[<<kind:var,val:"n">,ptype:int),
                                      <<kind:var,val:"t4">,ptype:typel)]>
                  Inst[12]          <kind:return)
                  Inst[13]          <kind:label,lbl:"LI">
                  Inst[14]        : <kind:return)

     FIG . 4 .9   The body of the mir program unit in s e r t_ n o d e in Figure 4.6 represented by ican
                  tuples.



                  m ir an d are defined in Figure 4 .1 0 . H IR _Exp_K ind(& ) indicates w hether a h ir
                  instruction o f k in d k co n tain s a ternary ex p re ssio n ,3 a binary exp ression , a unary
                  exp re ssio n , a list o f ex p re ssio n s, o r n o exp re ssio n , an d H IR _ H as_ L e ft (&) returns
                  t r u e if a h ir instruction o f k in d k h as a l e f t field an d f a l s e otherw ise.



4.7.3             Representing LIR in ICAN
                  T able 4 .9 sh ow s the co rrespo n d en ce betw een lir in struction s an d ican structures.
                  T h e last three item s represent o p eran d s. A s in the representation o f m ir and h ir
                  co d e in ic a n , we use the type IRO per to represent lir o p erato rs.
                        Th e en u m erated types LIR K in d , LIRO pdKind, an d LIR E xpK ind an d the func­
                  tion s L IR _ E xp _ K in d ( ) an d L IR _ H a s_ L e ft ( ) are declared in Figure 4 .1 1 .
                  L IR _E xp_ K in d (& ) indicates w hether a lir instruction o f k in d k co n tain s a binary



                  3. Only fo r instructions have ternary expressions.
             Section 4.7       Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN                                   87


TABLE 4.8 Representation of hir instructions that are not in mir in ican.

             for VarName <- Operandl by Operand2 to Operand3 do
                  <kind: f o r, l e f t : VarName, opdl: Operandl, opd2: Operandl, opd3: Operand3>
             endfor
                  <kind:endfor>
             i f Operandl Binop Operandl then
                   <kind: st r b in if , opr: Binop, opdl: Operandl, opd2: Operandl>
             i f Unop Operand then
                   <kind: stru n if, opr: Unop, opd: Operand>
             i f Operand then
                   <kind: s t r v a l i f , opd: Operand>
             else
                     <kind:else>
             endif
                     <kind:endif>
             VarName[Exprl,. . . ,Exprn] <- Operandl Binop Operandl
                 <kind: arybinasgn, l e f t : VarName, subs: [E xprl,. . ., Exprn] , opr: Binop,
                 opdl: Operandl, opd2: Operandl>
             VarName [Exprl,. . . , Exprn] <- Unop Operand
                  <kind: aryunasgn, l e f t : VarName, subs: [E xprl,. . ., Exprn] , opr: Unop,
                  opd: Operand}
             VarName [Exprl,. . ., Exprn] <- Operand
                  <kind: ary v a la sg n ,left: VarName, subs: [E xprl,. . ., Exprn] , opd -.Operand}
             VarName [Exprl, . . . , Exprn]
                  <kind: a ry ref, v ar: VarName, subs: [Exprl, . . . , Exprn] >



             expression, a unary expression, or no expression, and LIR_Has_Left (k) returns
             tru e if a lir instruction of kind k has a l e f t field and f a l s e otherwise.
                  A RegName operand may have as its value an integer register (written r /), a
             floating-point register (written f /), or a symbolic register (written si). The enumera­
             tion and function declared by

                    RegType = enum {r e g ,fr e g ,s y m r e g }
                    Reg-Type: R e g iste r —> RegType

             can be used to distinguish the three varieties. Memory addresses (denoted by
             t r a n (MemAddr) in Table 4.9) are represented as shown in Table 4.10.
                    As an example of the representation of lir code in ican , consider the code
             shown in Figure 4.12. The corresponding sequence of ican structures is shown in
             Figure 4.13.
88                   In te rm e d ia te R e p re se n ta tio n s


                     HIRKind = enum {
                         label,     receive,    binasgn, unasgn,                                     valasgn,
                         condasgn, castasgn, indasgn, eltasgn,                                       indeltasgn,
                         goto,      trap,       call,    callasgn,                                   return,
                         retval,    sequence, for,       endfor,                                     strbinif,
                         strunif,   strvalif, else,      endif,                                      arybinasgn,
                         aryunasgn, aryvalasgn}

                     HIROpdKind = enum {var,const,type,aryref}
                     HIRExpKind = enum {terexp,binexp,unexp,noexp,listexp>
                     HIR_Exp_Kind: HIRKind — > HIRExpKind
                     HIR_Has_Left: HIRKind — > boolean

                     HIR_Exp_Kind := {
                         <label,noexp>,                       < re c e iv e ,n o e x p > ,
                         <binasgn,binexp>,                    <u n asgn , u n ex p ),
                         <valasgn,unexp),                     <co n d asgn ,u n exp ),
                         <castasgn,unexp>,                    < in d asg n , unexp >,
                         <eltasgn,unexp),                     <in d e lta sg n ,u n e x p ),
                         <goto,noexp>,                        < tra p ,n o e x p > ,
                         <call,listexp>,                      < c a l l a s g n ,l i s t e x p > ,
                         <return,noexp>,                      < r e t v a l , u n ex p ),
                         <sequence,noexp>,                    < fo r ,t e r e x p > ,
                         <endfor,noexp>,                      <s t r b i n i f , b in e x p ),
                         <strunif,unexp),                     <s t r v a l i f , u n e x p ),
                         <else,noexp>,                        <e n d if,n o e x p > ,
                         <arybinasgn,binexp)                  <aryu nasagn , u n exp ),
                         <aryvalasagn,unexp)
                     >

                     HIR.Has.Left := {
                         <label,false),       <receive,true>,
                         <binasgn,true>,      <unasgn,true>,
                         <valasgn,true),      <condasgn,true),
                         <castasgn,true>,     <indasgn,true),
                         <eltasgn,true>,      <indeltasgn,true),
                         <goto,false),        <trap,false),
                         <call,false),        <callasgn,true>,
                         <return,false),      <retval,false),
                         <sequence,false), <for,true>,
                         <endfor,false),      <strbinif,false),
                         <strunif,false),     <strvalif,false),
                         <else,false),        <endif,false),
                         <arybinasgn,true>, <aryunasagn,true),
                         <aryvalas agn,true >
                     >
     F IG . 4 .1 0   ican types and functions to determine properties of hir instructions.
              Section 4.7    Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN                       89

TABLE 4,9 Representation of l ir instructions in ic a n .

              Label:
                   <kind:label,lbl:Labels
              RegName <- Operandl Binop Operand2
                   <kind:regbin,left:RegName,opr:Binop,opdl:O perandl,opd2:Operandl }
              RegName < - Unop Operand
                   <kind:regun,left:RegName,opr:Unop,opd:Operand}
              RegName    Operand
                   (kind:regval,left:RegName,opd:Operand}
              RegNamel <- (RegName!) Operand
                   (kind:regcond,left:R egN am el,cond:R egN am el,opd:Operand}
              RegName (Integer 1 , Integerl) <- Operand
                   (kind:regelt,left:RegName,fst:Integerl,blen:Integerl,opd:Operand}
              MemAddr <- Operand
                  (kind: stormem,addr :tran(MemAddr),opd: Operand}
              RegName <^MemAddr
                   (kind:loadmem,left:RegName,addr:tran (MemAddr)>
              goto Label
                    (kind:goto,lbl:Label}
              goto RegName + Integer
                   (kind:gotoaddr,reg:RegName,disp:Integer}
              if Operandl Binop Operandl goto Label
                   (kind:regbinif,opr:Binop,opdl:O perandl,opd2:O perandl,lbl:Label}
              if Unop Operand goto Label
                   (kind:regunif,opr:Unop,opd:Operand,lbl:Label>
              if Operand goto Label
                   (kind:regvalif,opr:Operand,lbl:Label}
              if Operandl Binop Operand! trap Integer
                   (kind:regbintrap,opr:Binop,opdl:O perandl,opd2:O perandl,
                   trapno:Integer}
              if Unop Operand trap Integer
                   (kind:reguntrap,opr:Unop,opd:Operand,trapno:Integer}
              if Operand trap Integer
                   (kind:regvaltrap,opr:Operand,trapno:Integer}
              call ProcName,RegName
                   kind:callreg,proc:ProcName,rreg:RegName}
              call RegNam el,RegNamel
                   (kind:callreg2,creg:RegN am el,rreg:RegNam el}
                                                                                  (continued)
90               Intermediate Representations


 TABLE 4.9 (continued)

                 RegNamel <- c a ll ProcName, RegName2
                     <kind: callregasgn , l e f t : RegNamel, proc: ProcName, rre g : RegNamel>
                 RegNamel <- c a ll RegNamel ,RegName3
                     <kind: callreg 3 , l e f t : RegNamel, creg: RegNamel, rreg : RegName3 >
                 return
                      <kind:return)
                 return Operand
                      <kind: re tv a l, opd: Operand>
                 sequence
                      <kind: sequence)
                 RegName
                      <kind: regno, v a l: RegName>
                 Const (includes Integer)
                       <kind: const,v a l: Const>
                 TypeName
                      <kind: type, v a l: TypeName>

                 LIRKind = enum {
                     label,      regbin, regun,     regval,      regcond,
                     regelt,     stormem, loadmem, goto,         gotoaddr,
                     regbinif,   regunif, regvalif, regbintrap,  reguntrap
                     regvaltrap, callreg, callreg2, callregasgn, callreg3,
                     return,     retval, sequence}

                 LIROpdKind = enum {regno,const,type}
                 LIRExpKind = enum {binexp,unexp,noexp}
                 LIR.Exp.Kind: LIRKind — > LIRExpKind
                 LIR_Has_Left: LIRKind — > boolean

                 LIR_Exp_Kind := {
                     {label,noexp),       {regbin,binexp),
                     <regun,unexp>,       {reg v al,unexp),
                     {regcond,unexp),     {r e g e lt,unexp),
                     {stormem,unexp),     {loadmem,noexp),
                     {goto,noexp>,        {gotoaddr,noexp),
                     {regbinif,binexp),   {regun if,unexp),
                     {regvalif,unexp),    {regbintrap,binexp),
                     {reguntrap,unexp),   {regvaltrap ,unexp),
                     {callreg,noexp),     {callreg2,noexp),
                     {callregasgn,noexp>, {callreg3,noexp),
                     {return,noexp),      {r e tv a l,unexp),
                     {sequence,noexp)}

     FIG. 4.11 ican data types and functions to determine properties of lir instructions.
              Section 4.7     Representing MIR, HIR, and LIR in ICAN                             91


              LIR_Has_Left := {
                  <label,false),             <regbin,true>,
                  <regun,true>,              < regval,true>,
                  <regcond,false),           < r e g e lt ,f a ls e ) ,
                  <stormem,false),           <loadmem,true>,
                  <goto,false),              <gotoaddr, f a l s e ) ,
                  <regbinif,false),          <regunif, f a l s e ) ,
                  <regvalif,false),          < re g b in tra p ,fa lse ),
                  <reguntrap,false),         <regvaltrap , f a l s e ) ,
                  <callreg,false),           < ca llre g 2 , f a l s e ) ,
                  <callregasgn,true>         <c a llre g 3 , true >,
                  <return,false),            < r e t v a l,f a l s e ) ,
                  <sequence,false)}

  FIG. 4.11   (continued)


TABLE 4.10 Representation of memory addresses (denoted by tra il (MemAddr) in Table 4.9).

              [RegNamel (Length)
                   <kind: addr l r , re g : RegName, le n : Length>
              [RegNamel+RegName2] (Length)
                   <kind: addr2r, re g : RegNamel, reg2 : RegNamel, le n : Length>
              [RegName+Integer] (Length)
                   <kind: addrrc, re g : RegName, d is p : Integer, le n : Length>


              LI: rl <- [r7+4]
                  r2     [r7+r8]
                  r3 <- rl + r2
                  r4 <-- r3
                  if r3 > 0 goto L2
                  r5 <-(r9) rl
                  [r7-8](2) <- r5
              L2: return r4

  FIG. 4.12 An example of lir code to be represented by ican tuples.


              Inst [1]      <kind:label,lbl:"LI">
              Inst [2]      <kind:loadmem,left:"rl",
                             addr:<kind:addrrc,reg:"r7",disp:4,len:4>>
              Inst[3]       <kind:loadmem,left:"r2",
                             addr:<kind:addr2r,reg:"r7",reg2:"r8",len:4>>
              Inst[4]       <kind:regbin,left:"r3",opr:add,opdl:<kind:regno,
                             val:"rl"),opd2:<kind:regno,val:"r2">>
                                                                                         (continued)
  FIG. 4.13 The sequence of ican tuples corresponding to the l Ir code in Figure 4.12.
92               In term ed iate R e p re se n ta tio n s


                 Inst[5]          <kind:regun,left:"r4",opr:neg,
                                   opd:<kind:regno,val:"r3"> >
                 Inst [6]         <kind:regbinif,opr:grtr,
                                   opdl:<kind:regno,val:"r3">,
                                   opd2:<kind:const,val:0>,lbl:"L2">
                 Inst[7]          <kind:regcond,left:"r5",sel:"r9",
                                   opd:<kind:regno,val:"r1"> >
                 Inst[8]          <kind:stormem,
                                   addr:<kind:addrrc,reg:"r7",disp:-8,len:2>,
                                   opd:<kind:regno,val:"r5"> >
                 Inst [9]         <kind:label,lbl:"L2">
                 Inst [10]        <kind:retval,opd:<kind:regno,val:"r4"> >

     FIG. 4.13   (continuedj


4 .8             ICAN Naming of Data Structures and
                 Routines that Manipulate Intermediate Code
                 From here on in the text, in alm ost every case, we view a procedure as consisting o f
                 several data structures, as follow s:

            1.   ProcName: P ro c e d u re , the nam e o f the procedure.

            2.   n b l o c k s : i n t e g e r , the num ber o f basic blocks m aking up the procedure.

            3.   n i n s t s : a r r a y [1 • ‘ n b lo c k s] o f i n t e g e r , an array such that for i = 1 , . . . ,
                 n b lo c k s, n i n s t s [/] is the num ber o f instructions in basic block /.

            4.   B lo c k , L B lo c k : a r r a y [1 • ‘ n b lo c k s] o f a r r a y [ • • ] o f I n s t r u c t i o n , the array
                 o f arrays o f h ir or m ir instructions (for B lo ck ) or l ir instructions (for LB lock) that
                 m ake up the basic blocks, i.e., B lo c k [/] [1 • -n i n s t s [/]] is the array o f instructions
                 in basic block /, and sim ilarly for LB lo ck .

            5.   S u c c , P r e d : i n t e g e r — > s e t o f i n t e g e r , the functions that m ap each basic block
                 index i to the sets o f indexes o f the successor and predecessor basic blocks, respec­
                 tively, o f block i.

                 In a few instances, such as sp arse conditional constant propagation (Section 12.6)
                 and basic-block scheduling (Section 17.1), where we focus on individual instruc­
                 tions, rather than blocks, we use slightly different nam ing conventions.
                     The procedures

                      i n s e r t _ b e f o r e ( / , / , n i n s t s , B lo c k , inst)
                      i n s e r t . a f t e r U , / , n i n s t s , B lo c k , in st)
                      a p p e n d .b lo c k ( / , n i n s t s , B l o c k , in st)

                 defined in Figure 4 .1 4 insert instruction inst before or after B lo c k [/] [/] or append
                 inst to B lo c k [/] and adjust the d ata structures accordingly. N ote that a request to
                 insert an instruction after the last instruction o f a block is handled specially if the
                 last instruction is a g o to or an i f — i.e., the instruction is inserted just before the
                 control-transfer instruction.
             Section 4.8      Data Structures and Routines that Manipulate Intermediate Code             93


             procedure insert_before(i,j,ninsts,Block,inst)
                 i, j : in integer
                ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
                Block: inout array [••] of array [••] of Instruction
                 inst: in Instruction
             begin
                 I| insert an instruction after position j in block i
                 I| and adjust data structures accordingly
                k: integer
                 for k := j to ninsts [i] do
                    Block[i][k+1] := Block[i][k]
                 od
                ninsts[i] += 1
                Block[i][j] := inst
             end     || insert_before

             procedure insert_after(i,j,ninsts,Block,inst)
                 i, j : in integer
                ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
                Block: inout array [••] of array [••] of Instruction
                 inst: in Instruction
             begin
                 I I insert an instruction after position j in block i
                 II and adjust data structures accordingly
                k: integer
                 if j = ninsts[i] & Control.Transfer(Block[i][j]) then
                    ninsts[i] := j += 1
                    Block[i] [j] := Block[i] [j-1]
                    Block[i] [j-1] := inst
                else
                    for k := j+1 to ninsts[i] do
                        Block[i][k+1] := Block [i] [k]
                    od
                    ninsts[i] += 1
                    Block[i] [j+1] := inst
                fi
             end     |I insert_after

             procedure append_block(i,ninsts,Block,inst)
                 i : in integer
                ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
                Block: inout array [••] of array [••] of Instruction
                 inst: in Instruction
             begin
                 I| add an instruction at the end of block i
                 insert_after(i,ninsts[i],Block,inst)
             end     I| append_block

fIG . 4.14 The ic a n routines in se rt_ b e fo re ( ), in s e r t_ a f te r ( ), and append_block( ) that
           insert an instruction into a basic block before or after a given position or append an
           instruction to a block.
94                Intermediate Representations

                  procedure delete_inst(i,j,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
                      i , j : in integer
                     nblocks: inout integer
                     ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
                     Block: inout array [••] of array [••] of Instruction
                      Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
                  begin
                      II delete instruction j from block i and adjust data structures
                      k: integer
                      for k := j to ninsts[i]—1 do
                          Block [i] [k] := Block [i] [k+1]
                      od
                     ninsts[i] -= 1
                      if ninsts[i] = 0 then
                          delete_block(i,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
                      fi
                  end     II delete_inst

     FIG. 4 .1 5 The ican routine d e le te _ in st( ) that deletes an instruction at a given position from a
                 basic block.

                  procedure insert.block(i,j,nblocks,ninsts,Succ,Pred)
                      i , j : in integer
                     nblocks: inout integer
                     ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
                      Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
                  begin
                      I| insert a new block between block i and block j
                     nblocks += 1
                     ninsts[nblocks] := 0
                      Succ(i) := (Succ(i) u {nblocks}) - {j}
                      Succ(nblocks) :- {j}
                     Pred(j) := (Pred(j) u {nblocks}) - {i}
                     Pred(nblocks) := {i}
                  end     II insert.block

     FIG. 4 .1 6 The ican routine in sert_ b lock ( ) that splits an edge by inserting a block between the
                 two given blocks.


                      The procedure
                      delete.inst(/,/,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
                  defined in Figure 4.15 deletes instruction j from block i and adjusts the other data
                  structures that are used to represent programs.
                      The procedure
                      insert_block(/,/,nblocks,ninsts,Succ,Pred)
                  defined in Figure 4.16 splits the edge i      / by inserting a new empty block between
                  block i and block /.
           Section 4.8   Data Structures and Routines that Manipulate Intermediate Code   95


           procedure delete_block(i,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
               i : in integer
              nblocks: inout integer
              ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
              Block: inout array [••] of array [••] of Instruction
               Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
           begin
               II delete block i and adjust data structures
               j, k: integer
               if i e Succ(i) then
                   Succ(i) -= {i>
                   Pred(i) -= {i}
               fi
               for each j e Pred(i) do
                   Succ(j) := (Succ(j) - {i}) u Succ(i)
               od
               for each j e Succ(i) do
                   Pred(j) := (Pred(j) - {i}) u Pred(i)
               od
              nblocks -= 1
               for j := i to nblocks do
                   Block[j] := Block[j+l]
                   Succ(j) := Succ(j+1)
                   Pred(j) := Pred(j+1)
               od
               for j := 1 to nblocks do
                   for each k e Succ(j) do
                      if k > i then
                         Succ(j) := (Succ(j) - {k}) u {k-l>
                      fi
                   od
                   for each k e Pred(j) do
                      if k > i then
                         Pred(j)     (Pred(j) - {k}) u {k-1}
                      fi
                   od
               od
           end     II delete.block

FIG. 4.17 The ican routine delete_block( ) that removes an empty basic block.



               The procedure

               delete.block(/,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)

           defined in Figure 4.17 deletes basic block i and adjusts the data structures that
           represent a program.
96      Intermediate Representations


4.9     Other Intermediate-Language Forms
        In this section, we describe several alternative representations of the instructions
        in a basic block of medium-level intermediate code (namely, triples; trees; directed
        acyclic graphs, or DAGs; and Polish prefix), how they are related to mir , and their
        advantages and disadvantages relative to it. In the output of a compiler’s front end,
        the control structure connecting the basic blocks is most often represented in a form
        similar to the one we use in m ir , i.e., by simple explicit gotos, i f s , and labels. It
        remains for control-flow analysis (see Chapter 7) to provide more information about
        the nature of the control flow in a procedure, such as whether a set of blocks forms
        an if-then-else construct, a while loop, or whatever.
              Two further important intermediate-code forms are static single-assignment
        form and the program dependence graph, described in Sections 8.11 and 9.5.
              First, note that the form we are using for mir and its relatives is not the
        conventional one for quadruples. The conventional form is written with the operator
        first, followed by the three operands, usually with the result operand first, so that our

            t l <r- X + 3

        would typically be written as

            +     t l,x ,3

        We have chosen to use the infix form simply because it is easier to read. Also,
        recall that the form shown here is designed as an external or printable notation,
        while the corresponding ican form discussed above can be thought of as an internal
        representation, although even it is designed for reading convenience—if it were truly
        an internal form, it would be a lot more compact and the symbols would most likely
        be replaced by pointers to symbol-table entries.
             It should also be noted that there is nothing inherently medium-level about any
        of the alternative representations in this section—they would function equally well
        as low-level representations.
             Figure 4.18(a) gives an example mir code fragment that we use in comparing
        mir to the other code forms.


4.9.1   Triples
        Triples are similar to quadruples, except that the results are not named explicitly in
        a triples representation. Instead, the results of the triples have implicit names that
        are used in other triples when they are needed as operands, and an explicit store
        operation must be provided, since there is no way to name a variable or storage
        location as the result of a triple. We might, for example, use “a sto fe” to mean
        store b in location a and “a * s t o b n for the corresponding indirect store through a
        pointer. In internal representations, triple numbers are usually either pointers to or
        index numbers of the triples they correspond to. This can significantly complicate
        insertion and deletion of triples, unless the targets of control transfers are nodes in a
        representation of the basic-block structure of the procedure, rather than references
        to specific triples.
              Section 4.9           Other Intermediate-Language Forms                             97


                         i <- i + 1                (i)        i + 1
                                                   (2)        i sto (1)
                        tl    i + 1                (3)        i + 1
                        t2 <- p + 4                (4)        p + 4
                        t3 <- *t2                  (5)        *(4)
                        p <- t2                    (6)        p sto (4)
                        t4 <- tl < 10              (7)        (3) < 10
                        *r <- t3                   (8)        r *sto (5)
                        if t4 goto LI              (9)        if (7), (1)

                                                   (b)

  FIG. 4.18 (a) A mir code fragment for comparison to other intermediate-code forms, and (b) its
            translation to triples.


                    <-

              /\
              i           add                    i :add

               / \  i           1            i            1
              (a)                            (b)

  FIG. 4.19 Alternative forms of trees: (a) with an explicit assignment operator, and (b) with the
            result variable labeling the root node of its computation tree.


                   In external representations, the triple number is usually listed in parentheses at
              the beginning of each line and the same form is used to refer to it in the triples,
              providing a simple way to distinguish triple numbers from integer constants. Fig­
              ure 4.18(b) shows a translation of the mir code in Figure 4.18(a) to triples.
                   Translation back and forth between quadruples and triples is straightforward.
              Going from quadruples to triples requires replacing temporaries and labels by triple
              numbers and introducing explicit store triples. The reverse direction replaces triple
              numbers by temporaries and labels and may absorb store triples into quadruples that
              compute the result being stored.
                   Using triples has no particular advantage in optimization, except that it simpli­
              fies somewhat the creation of the DAG for a basic block before code generation (see
              Section 4.9.3), performing local value numbering (see Section 12.4.1) in the process.
              The triples provide direct references to their operands and so simplify determining
              the descendants of a node.

4.9.2         Trees
              To represent intermediate code by trees, we may choose either to have explicit assign­
              ment operators in the trees or to label the root node of an expression computation
              with the result variable (or variables), as shown by Figure 4.19(a) and (b), respec­
              tively, a choice somewhat analogous to using quadruples or triples. We choose to use
98               Intermediate Representations


                 the second form, since it corresponds more closely than the other form to the DAGs
                 discussed in the following section. We label the interior nodes with the operation
                 names given in Figure 4.6 that make up the ican type IROper.
                      Trees are almost always used in intermediate code to represent the portions of
                 the code that do non-control-flow computation, and control flow is represented in
                 a form that connects sequences of trees to each other. A simple translation of the
                 (non-control-flow) mir code in Figure 4.18(a) to tree form is shown in Figure 4.20.
                 Note that this translation is, in itself, virtually useless—it provides one tree for each
                 quadruple that contains no more or less information than the quadruple.
                      A more ambitious translation would determine that the t l computed by the
                 second tree is used only as an operand in the sixth tree and that, since t l is a
                 temporary, there is no need to store into it if the second tree is grafted into the sixth
                 tree in place of the occurrence of t l there. Similar observations apply to combining
                 the third tree into the fifth. Notice, however, that the fourth tree cannot be grafted
                 into the seventh, since the value of p is changed between them. Performing these
                 transformations results in the sequence of trees shown in Figure 4.21.
                      This version of the tree representation has clear advantages over the quadruples:
                 (1) it has eliminated two temporaries ( t l and t2) and the stores to them; (2)
                 it provides the desired input form for the algebraic simplifications discussed in
                 Section 12.3.1; (3) locally optimal code can be generated from it for many machine
                 architectures by using Sethi-Ullman numbers, which prescribe the order in which
                 instructions should be generated to minimize the number of registers used; and (4) it
                 provides a form that is easy to translate to Polish-prefix code (see Section 4.9.4) for
                 input to a syntax-directed code generator (see Section 6.2).
                      Translating from quadruples to trees can be done with varying degrees of effort,
                 as exemplified by the sequences of trees in Figures 4.20 and 4.21. Translation to
                 the first form should be obvious, and achieving the second form can be viewed as
                 an optimization of the first. The only points about which we need to be careful are
                 that, in grafting a tree into a later one in the sequence, we must make sure that there


                 i:add      tl:add          t2:add          t3:ind   p:t2     t4:less    riindasgn


                i       1   i       1       p       4         p               tl    10       t3

     FIG. 4.20 Translation of the (non-control-flow) mir code in Figure 4.18(a) to a sequence of simple
               trees.


                                                        t4:less




                i   l           p       p       4   i   l             t3

     FIG. 4.21 Minimized tree form of the (non-control-flow) mir code in Figure 4.18(a).
            Section 4.9            Other Intermediate-Language Forms                               99


                          b:add


                a :add             a :add


            a             l    a            1

FIG. 4.22   Result of trying to translate the mir instructions a <- a + 1; b ^ a + a to a single
            tree.



                t4:less
                                            t5:add   t4:less
                                                                       t5 <- i + 1
                add       10
                                                                       t4 <- t5 < 10
                                            i    1   t5   10
            i         1
FIG. 4.23   Example of translation from minimized tree form to mir code.



            are no uses of any of the result variables that label nodes in the first one between
            its original location and the tree it is grafted into and that its operands are also not
            recomputed between the two locations.
                 Note that a sequence of m ir instructions may not correspond to a single tree
            for two distinct reasons— it may not be connected, or it may result in evaluating an
            instruction several times, rather than once. As an example of the latter situation,
            consider the code sequence

                   a <r- a + 1
                   b <- a + a

            This would result in the tree shown in Figure 4.22, which corresponds to evaluating
            the first instruction twice. We could, however, remove the label from the second
            “ a : add” node.
                  Translation from trees to quadruples is simple. We may proceed by either a pre­
            order traversal or a postorder one. In the first case, we perform a preorder traversal
            of each tree, in the order they appear. For each interior node (i.e., non-leaf node)
            with at least one descendant that is an interior node, we create a new temporary and
            divide the tree into two (call them the “ upper tree” and the “ lower tree” ) along the
            edge connecting the two interior nodes. We label the root of the lower tree with the
            new temporary, and insert the pair of trees in sequence (with the lower tree first) in
            place of the one we are dividing. We repair the upper tree by putting the new tempo­
            rary in place of the lower tree. An example from Figure 4.21 appears in Figure 4.23.
            When we no longer have any interior nodes with interior-node descendants, each
            tree corresponds to a single m ir instruction, and the remainder of the translation is
            obvious.
100          Interm ediate Representations


                   t4:less      r :indasgn

                   /\10
                 tl:add          t3:ind
                  / \
                 /\               p:add


             i
              /\J  1             P
                                  /\   4

  FIG. 4.24 DAG for the non-control-flow code of mir code in Figure 4.18(a).

                  In the second approach to translating from trees to m ir , we perform a postorder
             traversal of the given tree, generating a m ir instruction for each subtree that con­
             tains only a single operator and replacing its root by the left-hand side of the mir
             instruction.

4.9.3        Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs)
             The DAG representation of a basic block can be thought of as compressing the
             minimal sequence of trees that represents it still further. The leaves of such a DAG
             represent the values of the variables and constants available on entry to the block
             that are used within it. The other nodes of the DAG all represent operations and
             may also be annotated with variable names, indicating values computed in the
             basic block. We draw DAG nodes like the tree nodes in the preceding section. As
             an example of a DAG for a basic block, see Figure 4.24, which corresponds to
             the first seven instructions in Figure 4.18(a). In the DAG, the lower left “ add”
             node represents the m ir assignment “ i <- i + 1” , while the “ add” node above it
             represents the computation of “ i + 1” that is compared to 10 to compute a value
             for t4 . Note that the DAG reuses values, and so is generally a more compact
             representation than either trees or the linear notations.
                  To translate a sequence of m ir assignment instructions to a DAG, we process
             the instructions in order. For each one, we check whether each operand is already
             represented by a DAG node. If it is not, we make a DAG leaf for it. Then we
             check whether there is a parent of the operand node(s) that represents the current
             operation; if not, we create one. Then we label the node representing the result with
             the name of the result variable and remove that name as a label of any other node in
             the DAG.
                  Figure 4.25 is a sequence of m ir instructions and the graphic form of the
             corresponding DAG is shown in Figure 4.26. Note that, in the DAG, the neg node
             is an operator node that has no labels (it is created for instruction 4 and labeled d,
             but that label is then moved by instruction 7 to the mul node), so no code need be
             generated for it.
                  As mentioned above, the DAG form is useful for performing local value num­
             bering, but it is a comparatively difficult form on which to perform most other
             optimizations. On the other hand, there are node-listing algorithms that guide code
             generation from DAGs to produce quite efficient code.
              Section 4.10         Wrap-Up                                                        101


              1    c    <- a
              2    b    <- a + 1
              3    c    <- 2 * a
              4    d    <--c
              5    c    <- a + 1
              6    c    <- b + a
              7    d    <- 2 * a
              8    b    <— c

  FIG. 4.25 Example basic block of mir code to be converted to a DAG.


                  neg         b ,c:add




  FIG. 4.26 Graphic form of the DAG corresponding to the mir code in Figure 4.25.


              binasgn       i add  i 1
              unasgn       t3 ind p
              binasgn       p add p 4
              binasgn     t4 less add        i   1   10
              indasgn       r t3

  FIG. 4.27 Polish-prefix form of the trees in Figure 4.21 divided into instructions.


4.9.4         Polish-Prefix Notation
              Polish-prefix notation is essentially the result of a preorder traversal of one tree
              form or another. Translation between it and trees in both directions is a quite
              straightforward recursive process.
                    For the minimal tree form given in Figure 4.21, the Polish-prefix form is the code
              shown in Figure 4.27 (note that we assume that the one descendant of a unary node
              is its left child). The second line, for example, represents a unary assignment with t3
              as its left-hand side and the result of indirecting through p as its right-hand side.
                    Polish-prefix notation is most useful as input to syntax-directed code generators
              (see Section 6.2). On the other hand, it is of little use in optimization because its
              recursive structure is only implicit.


4.10          Wrap-Up
              In this chapter, we have discussed the design of intermediate-code representa­
              tions; compared and contrasted several, including abstract syntax trees, quadruples,
102        Intermediate Representations


           triples, trees, DAGs, and Polish-prefix notation; and selected three to use in our ex­
           amples in the rest of the book. We have chosen to use hir , m ir , and lir and have
           given both an external ascii form and an internal ican structure form for each.
                The concerns in selecting an intermediate-code form include expressiveness (the
           ability to represent the relevant concepts), appropriateness for the tasks to be per­
           formed on it, compactness and speed of access (so as not to waste space and/or
           time), ease of translating from source code to intermediate code and subsequently
           to relocatable machine language or another lower-level form, and development cost
           (whether it is already implemented or what it will cost to implement it).
                The basic mir is suitable for most optimizations (as is lir ), while the higher-
           level hir is used for dependence analysis (Chapter 9) and for some of the code
           transformations based on it, and the lower-level lir is used for optimizations that
           require that registers and addressing be explicit.
                Two other important intermediate code forms, static single-assignment (SSA)
           form and program dependence graphs, are discussed in Sections 8.11 and 9.5, re­
           spectively. We use the former in several optimizations, such as global value number­
           ing (Section 12.4.2) and sparse conditional constant propagation (Section 12.6).


4.11       Further Reading
            Sethi-Ullman numbers are discussed first in [SetU70] and more recently in [AhoS86].
                The primary description of Hewlett-Packard’s compilers for pa-risc is
            [CouH86].


4.12       Exercises
       4.1 Construct an abstract syntax tree that represents the C function
                double sumorprod(a,n,i)
                    double a [100];
                    int n;
                    int i;
                {   double acc;
                    int j ;
                    if (i == 0)
                    {   acc = 0.0;
                        for (j = 0; j < 100; j++)
                            acc += a [j];
                    } else
                    {   acc = 1.0;
                        for (i = 99; j >= 0; j— )
                            if (a[j] != 0.0)
                                 acc *= a [j];
                      }
                      return acc;
                >
       Section 4.12       Exercises                                                                   103


 4.2 Construct a h ir representation of the C function in Exercise 4.1.
 4.3   Construct a m ir representation of the C function in Exercise 4.1.
 4.4 Construct a lir representation of the C function in Exercise 4.1.
 4.5   Construct the ican representation of the m ir code in Exercise 4.3.
 4.6 Translate the m ir representation of the C function in Exercise 4.3 into (a) triples, (b)
     trees, (c) D AG s, and (d) Polish-prefix notation.
 4.7 Write an ican routine M I R _ t o _ T r ip le s ( n ,I n s t ,T I n s t ) that translates the array
     I n s t [1 ], .. . , I n s t [n] of m ir instructions to the array T I n st [1 ], . . . , T I n st [m]
     of triples and returns m as its value. Assume that triples are represented by records
     similar to those used for m ir instructions, except that (1) the additional k in d s s t o r e
     and in d s t o r e correspond, respectively, to the operators s t o and * s t o discussed in
     Section 4.9 .1 , (2) the other k in ds of triples have no l e f t fields, and (3) there is
     an additional type of operand < k in d :t r p l ,v a l :m * r a > that names the result o f the
     triple that is stored in T In st \nuni\ .
 4.8 Write an ican routine M I R _ to _ T r e e s(n ,I n s t, R oot) that translates the array
     I n s t [ l ] , . . . , I n s t [n] of m ir instructions to a collection o f trees whose roots it
     stores in Root [1 ], . . . , Root [m] and that returns m as its value. A tree node is an
     element of the type Node defined by
           L e a f = r e c o r d { k in d : enum { v a r , c o n s t } ,
                                     v a l : Var u C o n st,
                                     nam es: s e t o f V ar}
           I n t e r i o r = r e c o r d {k in d : IROper,
                                            I t , r t : Node,
                                            nam es: s e t o f V ar}
           Node = L e a f u I n t e r i o r

       If an interior node’s k in d is a unary operator, its operand is its I t field and its r t
       field is n i l .
 4.9 Write an ican routine P re fix _ to _ M IR (P P ,In st) that translates the sequence
     PP of Polish-prefix operators and operands to an array I n s t [ l ] , . . . , I n s t [ n ]
     o f m ir instructions and returns n as its value. Assume PP is of type sequ en ce o f
     (MIRKind u IROper u Var u C o n st), and Polish-prefix code is written as shown in
     Figure 4.27.
4.10 Write an ican routine DAG_to_M IR(R,Inst) that translates the D A G with set of
     roots R to an array I n s t [1 ], . . . , I n s t [n] o f m ir instructions and returns n as its
     value. Assume that nodes in a D A G are represented by the type Node defined above
     in Exercise 4.8.
                                                                   CHAPTER 5



                                Run-Time Support




I
     n this chapter, we undertake a quick review of the basic issues involved in sup­
     porting at run time the concepts commonly embodied in higher-level languages.
     Since most of these concepts are covered well and in considerable detail in in­
     troductory texts on compilers, we do not explore most of them in great detail. Our
main purpose is to remind the reader of the issues and alternatives, to suggest appro­
priate ways of handling run-time issues, and to provide references for further reading
where they may be useful. Some of the more advanced concepts, such as position-
independent code and heap storage management, are discussed in the final sections
of this chapter.
     In general, our concerns in this chapter are the software conventions necessary to
support various source languages, including data representation, storage allocation
for the various storage classes of variables, visibility rules, procedure calling, entry,
exit, and return, and so on.
     One issue that helps determine1 the organization of many run-time data struc­
tures is the existence of Application Binary Interface (ABI) standards for many archi­
tectures. Such standards specify the layout and characteristics of numerous aspects
of the run-time environment, thus easing the task of software producers by mak­
ing interoperability much more likely for software that satisfies the standards. Some
examples of such documents are the unix System V ABI and its processor-specific
supplements for various architectures, such as sparc and the Intel 386 architecture
family.
     We begin by considering data types and approaches to representing them effi­
ciently at run time in Section 5.1. Next, we briefly discuss register usage and ele­
mentary methods for managing it in Section 5.2 (approaches to globally optimizing
register usage are discussed in Chapter 16), and we discuss the structure of the stack
frame for a single procedure in Section 5.3. This is followed by a discussion of the

1. Some would say “ hinders creativity in determining.”

                                                                                105
106   Run-Time Support


      overall organization of the run-time stack in Section 5.4. In Sections 5.5 and 5.6,
      we discuss issues involved in supporting parameter passing and procedure calls. In
      Section 5.7, we discuss support for code sharing by means of dynamic linking and
      position-independent code. Finally, in Section 5.8, we discuss support for dynamic
      and polymorphic languages.




5.1   Data Representations and Instructions
      To implement a higher-level language, we must provide mechanisms to represent
      its data types and data-structuring concepts and to support its storage-management
      concepts. The fundamental data types generally include at least integers, characters,
      and floating-point values, each with one or more sizes and formats, enumerated
      values, and Booleans.
           We expect integer values to be mapped to an architecture’s fundamental integer
      type or types. At least one size and format, usually 32-bit signed two’s-complement,
      is supported directly by loads, stores, and computational operations on each of the
      real-world target architectures. Most also support 32-bit unsigned integers, either
      with a complete set of computational operations or very nearly so. Byte and half­
      word signed and unsigned integers are supported either by loads and stores for those
      lengths or by loads and stores of word-sized data and extract and insert opera­
      tions that create word-sized values, appropriately sign- or zero-extended, and the
      corresponding fundamental integer operations. Operations on longer integer types
      generally require multiple loads and stores (except, for some architectures, for dou­
      bleword quantities) and are generally supported by add with carry and subtract with
      borrow operations, from which the full set of multiple-precision arithmetic and re­
      lational operations can be constructed.
           Characters, until recently, have generally been byte-sized quantities, although
      there is now, more frequently, support for halfword character representations, such
      as Unicode, that encompass syllabic writing systems such as Katakana and Hiragana
      and logographic systems such as Chinese and Kanji. The support needed for individ­
      ual characters consists of loads, stores, and comparisons, and these operations are
      provided by the corresponding integer (signed or unsigned) byte and halfword loads
      and stores (or their constructed equivalents), integer comparisons, and occasionally
      by more complex instructions such as power’s load signed byte and compare in­
      dexed instruction. While many ciscs have some built-in support for one character
      representation or another (e.g., ascii for the DEC VAX series and ebcdic for the
      IBM System/370), more modern architectures generally do not favor a particular
      character set and leave it to the programmer to craft the appropriate operations in
      software.
           Floating-point values generally have two or three formats corresponding to
      ansi/ieee Std 754-1985—single, double, and (less frequently) extended precision,
      that generally occupy a word, a doubleword, and from 80 bits to a quadword, re­
      spectively. In all cases, the hardware directly supports single-precision loads and
      stores and, in most cases, double-precision ones as well, although extended loads
      and stores are usually not supported. Most current architectures, with the notable
Section 5.1      Data Representations and Instructions                                          107


exception of power and the Intel 386 architecture family, provide a full complement
of arithmetic and comparison operations for single- and double-precision values, ex­
cept that some omit the square root operation, and some, such as sparc Version 8,
include the quad-precision operations also, power provides only double-precision
operations and converts single-precision values to and from double in the process
of performing loads and stores,2 respectively, although PowerPC supports both
single- and double-precision formats directly. The Intel 386 architecture supports an
80-bit format in its floating-point registers. Operations may round to single or dou­
ble according to the setting of a field in a control register. Loads and stores may
convert single- and double-precision values to and from that format or load and store
80-bit values. For most architectures, the complex system of exceptions and excep­
tional values mandated by the standard requires some amount of software assis­
tance, and in some cases, such as Alpha, it requires a lot.
     Enumerated values are generally represented by consecutive unsigned integers
and the only operations required on them are loads, stores, and comparisons, except
for Pascal and Ada, which allow one to iterate over the elements of an enumerated
type. Booleans may be an enumerated type, as in Pascal, Modula-2, and Ada;
integers, as in C; or simply a separate type, as in Fortran 77.
     Arrays of values generally may have more than one dimension and, depending
on the source language, may have elements that are of a fundamental type or almost
any type. In either case, they may be thought of as ^-dimensional rectangular solids
with each of the n dimensions corresponding to a subscript position. They are most
often represented by conceptually slicing them either in row-major order (as in most
languages), or vice versa, in column-major order (as in Fortran), and then assigning
a storage block to each element according to its position in the slicing. Thus, for
example, a Pascal array declared var a : a r r a y [1. .1 0 ,0 . .5 ] of in te g e r occupies
(10 - 1 + 1) x (5 —0 + 1) = 60 words of storage, with, e.g., a [ l , 0 ] in the zeroth
word, a [1,1] in the first, a [2,0] in the sixth, and a [10,5] in the 59th. In general,
for a Pascal array exam declared
    var exam: array [/o j. . bi\ , loi • • h ii, . . . , lon. . hin'] of type
the address of element exam[sub\ ySubi, . . . ,swfe„] is
                                    n                  n
     base(exam) + size(type) •                —loj) ]~~[ (hij - h j + 1)
                                   i= i             /=/*+1

where base(exam) is the address of the first element of the array and size(type) is
the number of bytes occupied by each element.3 Similar formulas apply for other
languages, except that for Fortran the product runs from / = 1 to / = i — 1.
    Some architectures provide instructions that simplify processing of multiple
arrays. For example, the Intel 386 architecture family provides loads and stores (and
memory-to-memory moves) that use a base register, an index register scaled by 1, 2,

2. power also has a fused multiply and add that uses the full-length product as an operand of the
add.
3. Actually, for the sake of time efficiency, the compiler may round the size of each element up to a
unit that can be efficiently accessed in memory.
10 8              Run-Time Support


                  struct si {                      struct s2 {
                     int large1;                      int large2: 18;
                     short int small1;                int small2: 10;
                  >;                               >;
                  (a)                              (b)
       FIG. 5.1 Two C structs, one unpacked in (a) and the other packed in (b).



                               large1              small1
                                 32                      16         16
                  (a)

                        large2        small2
                          18            10     4
                  (b)
       FIG. 5.2 Representation of the structures in Figure 5.1.


                  4, or 8, and a displacement. Some architectures, such as power and pa-risc , provide
                  loads and stores with base-register updating and, in the case of pa-risc , scaling, that
                  simplify access to consecutive array elements and to parallel arrays with different­
                  sized elements.
                       Records consisting of multiple named fields are generally not supported directly
                  by machine operations. In most higher-level languages that provide them, they may
                  be either packed, i.e., with consecutive elements stored directly adjacent to each
                  other without regard to boundaries that would make access to them more efficient,
                  or unpacked, taking alignment into account. As an example, in C the structure
                  declarations in Figure 5.1(a) and (b), where the numbers after the colons represent
                  lengths in bits, would require a doubleword and a word, respectively. An object
                  of type s t r u c t s i would be stored as shown in Figure 5.2(a), while an object of
                  type s t r u c t s2 would be stored as shown in (b). Obviously, fields whose sizes and
                  boundary alignments correspond to implemented loads and stores can be accessed
                  and manipulated more easily than packed fields, which may require multiple loads
                  and stores to access an element and either shift and mask or extract and insert
                  operations, depending on the machine architecture.
                       Pointers generally occupy a word or a doubleword and are supported by loads,
                  stores, and comparisons. The object referenced by a pointer is usually accessed by
                  loading the pointer into an integer register and specifying that register to be used to
                  form the address in another load or a store instruction. Some languages, such as C
                  and C++, provide addition and subtraction of integers from a pointer to access array
                  elements.
                       Character strings are represented in various ways, depending on the source lan­
                  guage. For example, the Pascal and PL/I representations of a character string include
           Section 5.2     Register Usage                                                          109


           type color = set of (red, orange, yellow, green,
                                blue, indigo, violet);
           var primary: color;

           primary := [red, yellow, blue]

 FIG. 5.3 An example of sets in Pascal.


           a count of the number of characters it contains, while C strings are terminated
           with a null character, i.e., one with the value 0. The Intel 386 architecture provides
           move, compare, and scan string instructions. O f R i s e architectures, only p o w e r and
           PowerPC provide instructions specifically designed for string operations, namely,
           the load and store string (ls x , l s i , s t s x , and s t s i ) and load string and compare
           (lscb x ) instructions that use multiple registers and a byte offset to indicate the begin­
           ning address of the string. The others provide less support, such as m ip s ’s unaligned
           load and store instructions, or only the basic load and store instructions.
                Sets are generally represented by bit strings, with each bit indicating whether
           a particular element is in a set value or not. Thus, for example, given the Pascal set
           type c o lo r and variable prim ary in Figure 5.3, the representation of prim ary would
           usually be a word with the hexadecimal value 0x54, i.e., the third, fifth, and seventh
           bits from the right would be ones. An alternate representation is sometimes used if
           the sets are expected to be sparse, that is, to have many more possible elements
           than actual elements. In this representation, the set is a list of the bit positions
           that are ones, usually sorted in increasing order. Our example set would consist of
           four storage units, the first containing 3 (the number of elements) and the others
           containing the values 3, 5, and 7; the size of the storage units might be chosen based
           on the number of elements in the set type or might always be a word.
                Various higher-level languages provide a series of other types that can be repre­
           sented in terms of the types and type constructors we have discussed. For example,
           complex numbers can be represented as records consisting of two floating-point
           components, one each for the real and imaginary parts; and rationals can be rep­
           resented as records consisting of two integers, one each for the numerator and
           denominator, usually with the proviso that the greatest common factor of the two
           integers be one. O f course, languages with rich sets of type constructors can provide
           vast collections of types.
                The representations discussed above all assume that types are associated
           with variables and are known at compile time. Some languages, such as lisp and
           Smalltalk, associate types with data objects rather than variables, and may require
           type determination at run time. We leave consideration of this issue to Section 5.8.



.2         Register U sage
           The use of registers is among the most important issues in designing a compiler
           for any machine in which access to registers is faster than access to other levels
           of the memory hierarchy— a category that includes all current machines we are
110        Run-Time Support


           aware of and most of the machines that have ever been built. Ideally, we would
           allocate all objects to registers and avoid accessing memory entirely, if that were
           possible. While this objective applies to almost all c isc s, it is even more important
           for recent c isc implementations such as the Intel Pentium and its successors, which
           are biased toward making Rise-style instructions fast, and for Rises, since almost all
           operations in a Rise require their operands to be in registers and place their results
           in registers. Unfortunately, registers are always comparatively few in number, since
           they are among the most expensive resources in most implementations, both because
           of the area and interconnection complexity they require and because the number of
           registers affects the structure of instructions and the space available in instructions
           for specifying opcodes, offsets, conditions, and so on. In addition, arrays require
           indexing, a capability not supported by most register-set designs, so they cannot
           generally be held in registers.
                O f course, it is rarely the case that all data can be kept in registers all the time,
           so it is essential to manage carefully use of the registers and access to variables that
           are not in registers. In particular, there are four issues of concern:
      1.   to allocate the most frequently used variables to registers for as much of a program’s
           execution as possible;
      2.   to access variables that are not currently in registers as efficiently as possible;
      3.   to minimize the number of registers used for bookkeeping, e.g., to manage access to
           variables in memory, so as to make as many registers as possible available to hold
           variables’ values; and
      4.   to maximize the efficiency of procedure calls and related operations, such as entering
           and exiting a scoping unit, so as to reduce their overhead to a minimum.
           O f course, these objectives usually conflict with each other. In particular, efficient
           access to variables that are not in registers and efficient procedure calling may require
           more registers than we might otherwise want to devote to them, so this is an area
           where careful design is very important and where some architectural support may
           be appropriate. Very effective techniques for allocating frequently used variables to
           registers are covered in Chapter 16, so we will not consider that topic here.
                Among the things that may contend for registers are the following:
      stack pointer
          The stack pointer points to the current top of the run-time stack, which is usually
          what would be the beginning of the next procedure invocation’s local storage (i.e.,
          its stack frame) on the run-time stack.
      frame pointer
          The frame pointer (which may not be necessary) points to the beginning of the
          current procedure invocation’s stack frame on the run-time stack.
      dynamic link
         The dynamic link points to the beginning of the preceding frame on the run-time
         stack (or, if no frame pointer is used, to the end of the preceding frame) and is used
         to reestablish the caller’s stack frame when the current procedure invocation returns.
     Section 5.3    The Local Stack Frame                                                 111

     Alternatively this may be an integer in an instruction that represents the distance
     between the current and previous frame pointers, or, if frame pointers are not used,
     stack pointers.
static link
     The static link points to the stack frame for the closest invocation of the lexically
     enclosing scope and is used to access nonlocal variables (some languages, such as C
     and Fortran, do not require static links).
global offset table pointer
    The global offset table pointer points to a table used in code shared among multiple
    processes (see Section 5.7) to establish and access private (per process) copies of
    external variables (this is unnecessary if such sharing does not occur).
arguments
    Arguments passed to a procedure called by the one currently active.
return values
    Results returned by a procedure called by the one currently active.
frequently used variables
    The most frequently used local (and possibly nonlocal or global) variables.
temporaries
   Temporary values computed and used during expression evaluation and other short­
   term activities.

     Each of these categories will be discussed in the sections that follow.
         Depending on the design of the instruction set and registers, some operations
     may require register pairs or quadruples. Integer register pairs are frequently used
     for the results of multiply and divide operations, in the former case because the
     length of a product is the sum of the lengths of its operands and in the latter to
     provide space for both the quotient and the remainder; and for double-length shift
     operations, which some architectures, such as pa-risc , provide in place of the rotate
     operations commonly found in ciscs.



     The Local Stack Frame
     Despite the desirability of keeping all operands in registers, many procedures require
     an area in memory for several purposes, namely,1

1.   to provide homes for variables that either don’t fit into the register file or may not
     be kept in registers, because their addresses are taken (either explicitly or implicitly,
     as for call-by-reference parameters) or because they must be indexable;
2.   to provide a standard place for values from registers to be stored when a procedure
     call is executed (or when a register window is flushed); and
3.   to provide a way for a debugger to trace the chain of currently active procedures.
112              Run-Time Support


                Previous
                stack
                frame
                                                 Decreasing
                Old sp -                         memory
                                                 addresses



                Current     _________
                stack               a
                frame
                                                Offset of a from sp
                     sp

      FIG. 5.4 A stack frame with the current and old stack pointers.


                Since many such quantities come into existence on entry to a procedure and are no
                longer accessible after returning from it, they are generally grouped together into an
                area called a frame, and the frames are organized into a stack. M ost often the frames
                are called stack frames. A stack frame might contain values of parameters passed to
                the current routine that don’t fit into the registers allotted for receiving them, some
                or all of its local variables, a register save area, compiler-allocated temporaries, a
                display (see Section 5.4), etc.
                       To be able to access the contents of the current stack frame at run time, we
                assign them memory offsets one after the other, in some order (described below),
                and make the offsets relative to a pointer kept in a register. The pointer may be
                either the frame pointer f p, which points to the first location of the current frame,
                or the stack pointer sp, which points to the current top of stack, i.e., just beyond the
                last location in the current frame. M ost compilers choose to arrange stack frames in
                memory so the beginning of the frame is at a higher address than the end of it. In this
                way, offsets from the stack pointer into the current frame are always non-negative,
                as shown in Figure 5.4.
                       Some compilers use both a frame pointer and a stack pointer, with some vari­
                ables addressed relative to each (Figure 5.5). Whether one should choose to use the
                stack pointer alone, the frame pointer alone, or both to access the contents of the
                current stack frame depends on characteristics of both the hardware and the lan­
                guages being supported. The issues are ( 1 ) whether having a separate frame pointer
                wastes a register or is free; (2 ) whether the short offset range from a single register
                provided in load and store instructions is sufficient to cover the size of most frames;
                and (3) whether one must support memory allocation functions like the C library’s
                a l l o c a ( ), which dynamically allocates space in the current frame and returns a
                pointer to that space. Using the frame pointer alone is generally not a good idea,
                since we need to save the stack pointer or the size of the stack frame somewhere
                anyway, so as to be able to call further procedures from the current one. For most
                architectures, the offset field in load and store instructions is sufficient for most stack
                frames and there is a cost for using an extra register for a frame pointer, namely,
          Section 5.3       The Local Stack Frame                                              113




              Previous
                                                              i
                                                         Decreasing
              stack                                      memory
              frame                                      addresses


          fp (old sp)
                                                              i

                                                         Offset of a
                                                         from f p
              Current
              stack                       a
              frame


                   s p ----- ► '----------------------

FIG. 5.5 A stack frame with frame and stack pointers.



          saving it to memory and restoring it and not having it available to hold the value of
          a variable. Thus, using only the stack pointer is appropriate and desirable if it has
          sufficient range and we need not deal with functions like a l l o c a ( ).
               The effect of a l l o c a ( ) is to extend the current stack frame, thus making the
          stack pointer point to a different location from where it previously pointed. This, of
          course, changes the offsets of locations accessed by means of the stack pointer, so
          they must be copied to the locations that now have the corresponding offsets. Since
          one may compute the address of a local variable in C and store it anywhere, this
          dictates that the quantities accessed relative to sp must not be addressable by the user
          and that, preferably, they must be things that are needed only while the procedure
          invocation owning the frame is suspended by a call to another procedure. Thus, sp-
          relative addressing can be used for such things as short-lived temporaries, arguments
          being passed to another procedure, registers saved across a call, and return values.
          So, if we must support a l l o c a ( ), we need both a frame pointer and a stack pointer.
          While this costs a register, it has relatively low instruction overhead, since on entry
          to a procedure, we ( 1 ) save the old frame pointer in the new frame, (2 ) set the frame
          pointer with the old stack pointer’s value, and (3) add the length of the current frame
          to the stack pointer, and, essentially, reverse this process on exit from the procedure.
          On an architecture with register windows, such as sparc , this can be done even more
          simply. If we choose the stack pointer to be one of the out registers and the frame
          pointer to be the corresponding in register, as the sparc Un ix System V ABI specifies,
          then the sav e and r e s t o r e instructions can be used to perform the entry and exit
          operations, with saving registers to memory and restoring left to the register-window
          spill and fill trap handlers.
               An alternative that increases the range addressable from sp is to make it point
          some fixed distance below the top of the stack (i.e., within the current stack frame),
          so that part of the negative offset range from it is usable, in addition to positive
114        Run-Time Support


           offsets. This increases the size of stack frames that can be accessed with single load
           or store instructions in return for a small amount of extra arithmetic to find the real
           top of the stack in the debugger and any other tools that may need it. Similar things
           can be done with fp to increase its usable range.


5.4        The Run-Time Stack
           At run time we do not have all the symbol-table structure present, if any. Instead,
           we must assign addresses to variables during compilation that reflect their scopes
           and use the resulting addressing information in the compiled code. As discussed in
           Section 5.3, there are several kinds of information present in the stack; the kind of
           interest to us here is support for addressing visible nonlocal variables. As indicated
           above, we assume that visibility is controlled by static nesting. The structure of the
           stack includes a stack frame for each active procedure,4 where a procedure is defined
           to be active if an invocation of it has been entered but not yet exited. Thus, there may
           be several frames in the stack at once for a given procedure if it is recursive, and the
           nearest frame for the procedure statically containing the current one may be several
           levels back in the stack. Each stack frame contains a dynamic link to the base of the
           frame preceding it in the stack, i.e., the value of f p for that frame.5
                In addition, if the source language supports statically nested scopes, the frame
           contains a static link to the nearest invocation of the statically containing procedure,
           which is the stack frame in which to look up the value of a variable declared in that
           procedure. That stack frame, in turn, contains a static link to the nearest frame for an
           invocation of its enclosing scope, and so on, until we come to the global scope. To set
           the static link in a stack frame, we need a mechanism for finding the nearest invocation
           of the procedure (in the stack) that the current procedure is statically nested in. Note
           that the invocation of a procedure not nested in the current procedure is itself a
           nonlocal reference, and the value needed for the new frame’s static link is the scope
           containing that nonlocal reference. Thus,
      1.   if the procedure being called is nested directly within its caller, its static link points
           to its caller’s frame;
      2.   if the procedure is at the same level of nesting as its caller, then its static link is a copy
           of its caller’s static link; and
      3.   if the procedure being called is n levels higher than the caller in the nesting structure,
           then its static link can be determined by following n static links back from the caller’s
           static link and copying the static link found there.
                An example of this is shown in Figures 5.6 and 5.7. For the first call, from f ( )
           to g ( ), the static link for g ( ) is set to point to f ( ) ’s frame. For the call from g ( )

           4. We assume this until Chapter 15, where we optimize away some stack frames.
           5. If the stack model uses only a stack pointer to access the current stack frame and no frame
           pointer, then the dynamic link points to the end of the preceding frame, i.e., to the value of sp for
           that frame.
          Section 5.4          The Run-Time Stack                                                    115


          p ro ced u re f ( )
          b e g in
               p ro ced u re g ( )
               b e g in
                     c a l l h( )
                end
               p ro ced u re h ( )
               b e g in
                     c a ll i( )
                end
               p ro ced u re i ( )
               b e g in
                     p ro ced u re j ( )
                     b e g in
                          p ro ced u re k ( )
                          b e g in
                                p ro ced u re 1 ( )
                                b e g in
                                      c a ll g( )
                                end
                                c a l l 1( )
                           end
                           c a ll k( )
                     end
                     c a ll j ( )
               end
                c a ll g( )
          end

FIG. 5.6 An example of nested procedures for static link determination.

          to h( ), the two routines are nested at the same level in the same routine, so h( ) ’s
          static link is a copy of g ( ) ’s. Finally, for the call from l ( ) t o g ( ) , g ( ) i s nested
          three levels higher in f ( ) than 1 ( ) is, so we follow three static links back from
          1 ( ) ’s and copy the static link found there.
               As discussed below in Section 5.6.4, a call to an imported routine or to one in a
          separate package must be provided a static link along with the address used to call it.
               Having set the static link for the current frame, we can now do up-level ad ­
          dressing of nonlocal variables by following static links to the appropriate frame. For
          now, we assume that the static link is stored at offset s l _ o f f from the frame pointer
          fp (note that s l _ o f f is the value stored in the variable S ta tic L in k O ff s e t used in
          Section 3.6). Suppose we have procedure h( ) nested in procedure g ( ), which in
          turn is nested in f ( ). To load the value of f ( ) ’s variable i at offset i _ o f f in its
          frame while executing h( ), we would execute a sequence of instructions such as the
          following l ir :I
                r l <r- [ f p + s l_ o f f ]          I I g e t fram e p o in te r o f g ( )
                r 2 <r- [ r l + s l _ o f f ]         I I g e t fram e p o in te r of f ( )
                r3 <- [r 2 + i_ o ff]                 I I lo a d v a lu e of i
116              Run-Time Support




      FIG. 5.7 (a) Static nesting structure of the seven procedures and calls among them in Figure 5.6,
               and (b) their static links during execution (after entering g( ) from 1 ( )).


                 While this appears to be quite expensive, it isn’t necessarily. First, accessing nonlocal
                 variables is generally infrequent. Second, if nonlocal accesses are common, a mecha­
                 nism called a display can amortize the cost over multiple references. A display keeps
                 all or part of the current sequence of static links in either an array of memory loca­
                 tions or a series of registers. If the display is kept in registers, nonlocal references are
                 no more expensive than references to local variables, once the display has been set
                 up. Of course, dedicating registers to holding the display may be disadvantageous,
                 since it reduces the number of registers available for other purposes. If the display is
                 kept in memory, each reference costs at most one extra load to get the frame pointer
                 for the desired frame into a register. The choice regarding whether to keep the display
                 in memory or in registers, or some in each, is best left to a global register allocator,
                 as discussed in Chapter 16.


5.5              Param eter-Passing Disciplines
                 There are several mechanisms for passing arguments to and returning results from
                 procedures embodied in existing higher-level languages, including ( 1 ) call by value,
                 (2) call by result, (3) call by value-result, (4) call by reference, and (5) call by
                 name. In this section, we describe each of them and how to implement them, and
                 mention some languages that use each. In addition, we discuss the handling of label
Section 5.5    Parameter-Passing Disciplines                                         117


parameters, which some languages allow to be passed to procedures. We use the
term arguments or actual arguments to refer to the values or variables being passed
to a routine and the term parameters or form al parameters to refer to the variables
they are associated with in the called routine.
     Conceptually, call by value passes an argument by simply making its value
available to the procedure being called as the value of the corresponding formal
parameter. While the called procedure is executing, there is no interaction with the
caller’s variables, unless an argument is a pointer, in which case the callee can use it
to change the value of whatever it points to. Call by value is usually implemented
by copying each argument’s value to the corresponding parameter on entry to the
called routine. This is simple and efficient for arguments that fit into registers, but
it can be very expensive for large arrays, since it may require massive amounts of
memory traffic. If we have the caller and callee both available to analyze when we
compile either of them, we may be able to determine that the callee does not store
into a call-by-value array parameter and either it does not pass it on to any routines it
calls or the routines it calls also do not store into the parameter (see Section 19.2.1);
in that case, we can implement call by value by passing the address of an array
argument and allowing the callee to access the argument directly, rather than having
to copy it.
     Versions of call by value are found in C, C++, Alg o l 60, and Algo l 68. In C,
C++, and Alg o l 68, it is the only parameter-passing mechanism, but in all three, the
parameter passed may be (and for some C and C++ types, always is) the address of
an object, so it may have the effect o f call by reference, as discussed below. Ada in
parameters are a modified form of call by value— they are passed by value, but are
read-only within the called procedure.
     Call by result is similar to call by value, except that it returns values from the
callee to the caller rather than passing them from the caller to the callee. On entry
to the callee, it does nothing; when the callee returns, the value of a call-by-result
parameter is made available to the caller, usually by copying it to the actual argument
associated with it. Call by result has the same efficiency considerations as call by
value. It is implemented in Ada as out parameters.
     Call by value-result is precisely the union of call by value and call by result. On
entry to the callee, the argument’s value is copied to the parameter and on return,
the parameter’s value is copied back to the argument. It is implemented in Ada as
in ou t parameters and is a valid parameter-passing mechanism for Fortran.
     Call by reference establishes an association between an actual argument and
the corresponding parameter on entry to a procedure. At that time, it determines
the address of the argument and provides it to the callee as a means for access­
ing the argument. The callee then has full access to the argument for the duration
of the call; it can change the actual argument arbitrarily often and can pass it on
to other routines. Call by reference is usually implemented by passing the address
of the actual argument to the callee, which then accesses the argument by means
of the address. It is very efficient for array parameters, since it requires no copy­
ing, but it can be inefficient for small arguments, i.e., those that fit into registers,
since it precludes their being passed in registers. This can be seen by considering
118   Run-Time Support


      a call-by-reference argument that is also accessible as a global variable. If the argu­
      ment’s address is passed to a called routine, accesses to it as a parameter and as a
      global variable both use the same location; if its value is passed in a register, ac­
      cess to it as a global variable will generally use its memory location, rather than the
      register.
           A problem may arise when a constant is passed as a call-by-reference parameter.
      If the compiler implements a constant as a shared location containing its value that is
      accessed by all uses of the constant in a procedure, and if it is passed by reference to
      another routine, that routine may alter the value in the location and hence alter the
      value of the constant for the remainder of the caller’s execution. The usual remedy is
      to copy constant parameters to new anonymous locations and to pass the addresses
      of those locations.
           Call by reference is a valid parameter-passing mechanism for Fortran. Since C,
      C++, and Algol 68 allow addresses of objects to be passed as value parameters, they,
      in effect, provide call by reference also.
           The semantics of parameter passing in Fortran allow either call by value-result
      or call by reference to be used for each argument. Thus, call by value-result can be
      used for values that fit into registers and call by reference can be used for arrays,
      providing the efficiency of both mechanisms for the kinds of arguments for which
      they perform best.
           Call by name is the most complex parameter-passing mechanism, both con­
      ceptually and in its implementation, and it is really only of historical significance
      since Algol 60 is the only well-known language that provides it. It is similar to
      call by reference in that it allows the callee access to the caller’s argument, but
      differs in that the address of the argument is (conceptually) computed at each ac­
      cess to the argument, rather than once on entry to the callee. Thus, for example,
      if the argument is the expression a [ i ] and the value of i changes between two
      uses of the argument, then the two uses access different elements of the array.
      This is illustrated in Figure 5.8, where i and a [ i ] are passed by the main pro­
      gram to procedure f ( ). The first use of the parameter x fetches the value of a [ l ] ,
      while the second use sets a [2 ]. The call to out in te g e r ( ) prints 5 5 2 . If call by
      reference were being used, both uses would access a [ l ] and the program would
      print 5 5 8 . Implementing call by name requires a mechanism for computing the
      address of the argument at each access; this is generally done by providing a pa­
      rameterless procedure called a thunk. Each call to an argument’s thunk returns its
      current address. This, of course, can be a very expensive mechanism. However,
      many simple cases can be recognized by a compiler as identical to call by refer­
      ence. For example, passing a simple variable, a whole array, or a fixed element
      of an array always results in the same address, so a thunk is not needed for such
      cases.
           Labels may be passed as arguments to procedures in some languages, such
      as Algol 60 and Fortran, and they may be used as the targets of got os in the
      procedures they are passed to. Implementing this functionality requires that we pass
      both the code address of the point marked by the label and the dynamic link of the
      corresponding frame. A goto whose target is a label parameter executes a series of
             Section 5.6             Procedure Prologues, Epilogues, Calls, and Returns        119


             begin
                in te g e r arra y a [ 1 :2 ] ; in te g e r i ;
                procedure f ( x , j ) ;
                    in te g e r x , j ;
                    begin in te g e r k;
                          k := x;
                          J := j + 1;
                          x = j;
                          f := k;
                    end;
                i := 1;
                a [1] := 5;
                   a [2] := 8;
                   out in te g e r (a [1] , f ( a [ i ] , i ) , a [ 2 ] ) ;
             end

  FIG. 5.8 Call by name parameter-passing mechanism in Al g o l 60.

             one or more return operations, until the appropriate stack frame (indicated by the
             dynamic link) is reached, and then executes a branch to the instruction indicated by
             the label.

5.6          Procedure Prologues, Epilogues, Calls,
             and Returns
             Invoking a procedure from another procedure involves a handshake to pass control
             and argument values from the caller to the callee and another to return control and
             results from the callee to the caller. In the simplest of run-time models, executing a
             procedure consists of five major phases (each of which, in turn, consists of a series
             of steps), as follows:
        1.   The procedure call assembles the arguments to be passed to the procedure and
             transfers control to it.
             (a) Each argument is evaluated and put in the appropriate register or stack location;
                  “ evaluation” may mean computing its address (for reference parameters), its
                  value (for value parameters), etc.
             (b) The address of the code for the procedure is determined (or, for most languages,
                  was determined at compile time or at link time).
              (c) Registers that are in use and saved by the caller are stored in memory.
             (d) If needed, the static link of the called procedure is computed.
              (e) The return address is saved in a register and a branch to the procedure’s code is
                  executed (usually these are done by a single c a l l instruction).
        2.   The procedure’s prologue, executed on entry to the procedure, establishes the ap­
             propriate addressing environment for the procedure and may serve other functions,
             such as saving registers the procedure uses for its own purposes.
120        Run-Time Support


           (a) The old frame pointer is saved, the old stack pointer becomes the new frame
               pointer, and the new stack pointer is computed.
           (b) Registers used by the callee and saved by the callee are stored to memory.
           (c) If the run-time model uses a display, it is constructed.
      3.   The procedure does its work, possibly including calling other procedures.
      4.   The procedure’s epilogue restores register values and the addressing environment of
           the caller, assembles the value to be returned, and returns control to the caller.
            (a) Registers saved by the callee are restored from memory.
           (b) The value (if any) to be returned is put in the appropriate place.
            (c) The old stack and frame pointers are recovered.
           (d) A branch to the return address is executed.
      5.   Finally, the code in the caller following the call finishes restoring its execution
           environment and receives the returned value.
           (a) Registers saved by the caller are restored from memory.
           (b) The returned value is used.

                Several issues complicate this model, including: how the parameter-passing
           mechanism varies with the number and types of arguments, dividing up the regis­
           ters into sets saved by the caller, saved by the callee, or neither (“ scratch” registers);
           the possibility of calling a procedure whose address is the value of a variable; and
           whether a procedure is private to the process containing it or shared (discussed in
           Section 5.7).
                Managing registers efficiently across the procedure call interface is essential to
           achieving high performance. If the caller assumes that the callee may use any regis­
           ter (other than those dedicated to particular purposes, such as the stack pointer) for
           its own purposes, then it must save and restore all the registers it may have use­
           ful values in—potentially almost all the registers. Similarly, if the callee assumes
           that all the undedicated registers are in use by the caller, then it must save and
           restore all the registers the caller may have useful values in—again, potentially al­
           most all the registers. Thus, it is very important to divide the register set in an
           optimal way into four classes, namely, ( 1 ) dedicated (manipulated only by the call­
           ing conventions), (2) caller-saved, (3) callee-saved, and (4) scratch (not saved across
           procedure calls at all). Of course, the optimal division depends on architectural fea­
           tures, such as register windows, as in sparc ; sharing one register set for integer
           and floating-point data, as in the Motorola 88000; and architectural restrictions,
           such as the Intel 386 architecture family’s small number of registers and their in­
           homogeneity. The optimal division may vary from program to program. Interpro­
           cedural register allocation, as described in Section 19.6, can mitigate the impact of
           the variation from one program to another. Lacking that, experiment and experi­
           ence are the best guides for determining a satisfactory partition. Some examples
           of ways to divide the register set are provided in the unix ABI processor supple­
           ments.
        Section 5.6      Procedure Prologues, Epilogues, Calls, and Returns                               121

            Note that both of the methods that pass parameters in registers need to incor­
        porate a stack-based approach as well— if there are too many parameters to pass in
        the available registers, they are passed on the stack instead.


5.6.1   Parameters Passed in Registers: Flat Register File
        In architectures with large general-purpose register files, parameters are usually
        passed in registers. A sequence of integer registers and a sequence of floating-point
        registers are designated to contain the first ia integer arguments and the first fa
        floating-point arguments, for some small values of ia and fa,6 with the arguments
        divided in order between the two register sets according to their types, and the
        remaining arguments, if any, passed in storage at an agreed point in the stack.
        Suppose we have a call f ( i , x , j ) with parameters passed by value, where the first
        and third parameters are integers and the second is a single-precision floating-point
        value. Thus, for our example, the arguments i and j would be passed in the first
        two integer parameter registers, and x would be passed in the first floating-point
        parameter register. The procedure-invocation handshake includes making the code
        generated for f ( ) receive its parameters this way (this example is used in Exercises
        5 .4 -5 .6 in Section 5.11).
              This mechanism is adequate for value parameters that fit into single registers or
        into pairs of registers and for all reference parameters. Beyond that size, another con­
        vention is typically used for value parameters, namely, the address of the argument
        is passed to the called procedure and it is responsible for copying the param eter’s
        value into its own stack frame or into other storage. The size of the argument may
        also be passed, if needed.
              If more than ia integer arguments or more than fa floating-point arguments are
        passed, the additional ones are typically passed on the stack just beyond the current
        stack pointer and, hence, can be accessed by the called routine with non-negative
        offsets from the new frame pointer.
              Returning a value from a procedure is typically done in the same way that
        arguments are passed, except that, in most languages, there may not be more than
        one return value and some care is required to make procedures reentrant, i.e.,
        executable by more than one thread of control at the same time. Reentrancy is
        achieved by returning values that are too large to fit into a register (or two registers)
        in storage provided by the caller, rather than storage provided by the callee. To make
        this work, the caller must provide, usually as an extra hidden argument, a pointer
        to an area of storage where it will receive such a value .7 The callee can then put it
        there, rather than having to provide storage for the value itself.


        6. Weicker found that the average number of arguments passed to a procedure is about 2, and other
        studies have substantially agreed with that result, so the value of n is typically in the range 5 to 8.
        However, some system specifications allow many more; in particular, the un ix System V ABI for
        the Intel i860 makes available 12 integer and 8 floating-point registers for parameter passing.
        7. If the caller also provides the size of the area as a hidden argument, the callee can check that the
        value it returns fits into the provided area.
122               Run-Tim e     Support


                         fp            Old f p
                     fp -4             Static link
                     fp -8             Return address
                   fp - 1 2
                                       Callee-saved g rs
                                       (12 words)
                   fp -5 6
                   fp - 6 0
                                       Callee-saved f r s
                                       (14 words)
                  fp - 1 1 2
                  fp - 1 1 6
                                       Local variables
                                       (4 words)
                  fp - 1 2 8
                  sp+100
                                       Caller-saved g rs
                                       (11 words)
                   sp+ 6 0
                   sp + 5 6
                                       Caller-saved f r s
                                       (14 words)
                     sp + 4
                         sp

      FIG. 5 .9   Structure of the stack frame for the procedure-calling example with parameters passed
                  in registers.

                         A typical register usage might be as follows:

                         Registers         U sage

                         rO                 0
                         r l — r5           Parameter passing
                         r6                 Frame pointer
                         r7                 Stack pointer
                         r 8—rl9            Caller-saved
                         r2 0 — r3 0        Callee-saved
                         r31                Return address

                         fO— f 4           Param eter passing
                         f 5— f 18         Caller-saved
                         f 19— f 31        Callee-saved

                  and might return a result in r l or fO, according to its type. We choose the stack
                  structure shown in Figure 5.9, where we assum e that the local variables occupy four
                  words and that g r and f r abbreviate “ general register” and “ floating-point register,”
        Section 5.6    Procedure Prologues, Epilogues, Calls, and Returns                     123


        respectively. Were it necessary to pass some parameters on the stack because there
        are too many of them to all be passed in registers or if the called routine were to
        traverse the parameter list, space would be allocated between fp-128 and sp+104
        to accommodate them. Exercise 5.4 requests that you produce code for a procedure
        call, prologue, parameter use, epilogue, and return for this model.

5.6.2   Parameters Passed on the Run-Time Stack
        In the stack-based model, the arguments are pushed onto the run-time stack and used
        from there. In a machine with few registers and stack-manipulation instructions,
        such as the VAX and the Intel 386 architecture, we use those instructions to store
        the arguments in the stack. This would, for example, replace
             r l <- 5               II put th ir d argument on sta c k
             sp <r- sp - 4
        by
             pushl     5            ; push th ir d argument onto sta c k
        for the Intel 386 architecture family. Also, we would not need to adjust the stack
        pointer after putting the arguments on the stack—the pushes would do it for us. The
        return value could either be passed in a register or on the stack; we use the top of
        the floating-point register stack in our example.
              For the Intel 386 and its successors, the architecture provides eight 32-bit integer
        registers. Six of the registers are named eax, ebx, ecx, edx, e s i, and ed i and are,
        for most instructions, general-purpose. The other two, ebp and esp, are the base
        (i.e., frame) pointer and stack pointer, respectively. The architecture also provides
        eight 80-bit floating-point registers known as s t ( 0 ) (or just s t) through s t ( 7 )
        that function as a stack, with s t ( 0 ) as the current top of stack. In particular, a
        floating-point return value is placed in s t ( 0 ). The run-time stack layout is shown in
        Figure 5.10.
              Exercise 5.5 requests that you produce code for a procedure call, prologue,
        parameter use, epilogue, and return for this model.

5.6.3   Parameter Passing in Registers with Register Windows
        Register windows, as provided in sparc, simplify the process of passing arguments
        to and returning results from procedures. They also frequently result in a significant
        reduction in the number of loads and stores executed, since they make it possible
        to provide a much larger register file without increasing the number of bits required
        to specify register numbers (typical sparc implementations provide seven or eight
        windows, or a total of 128 or 144 integer registers) and take advantage of locality
        of procedure calls through time.
            The use of register windows prescribes, in part, the division of the integer
        registers into caller- and callee-saved: the caller’s local registers are not accessible to
        the callee, and vice versa for the callee’s local registers; the caller’s out registers are
        the callee’s in registers and so are primarily dedicated (including the return address
124          Run-Time Support




             ebp+20           3rd argument
             ebp+16           2nd argument
             ebp+12           1st argument
               ebp+8          Static link
               ebp+4          Return address
                  ebp         Caller’ s ebp
               ebp-4
                              Local variables
                              (4 words)
             e b p - 16
               esp+ 8         Caller’ s e d i
               esp+4          Caller’s e s i
                  e sp        Caller’ s ebx



  FIG. 5.10 Structure of the stack frame for the procedure-calling example with parameters passed
            on the run-time stack for the Intel 386 architecture family.


             and the caller’s stack pointer, which becomes the callee’s frame pointer) or used for
             receiving parameters; the callee’s out registers can be used as temporaries and are
             used to pass arguments to routines the callee calls. Saving values in the windowed
             registers to memory and restoring them is done by the window spill and fill trap
             handlers, rather than by user code. Figure 5.11 shows the overlapping relationships
             among three routines’ register windows.
                  When a procedure call is executed, out registers oO through o5 conventionally
             contain integer arguments that are being passed to the current procedure (floating­
             point arguments are passed in the floating-point registers). The stack pointer sp is
             conventionally in 0 6 and the frame pointer fp is in i 6 , so that a sav e executed in a
             called procedure causes the old sp to become the new fp . Additional arguments, if
             any, are passed on the run-time stack, as in the flat register model. When a procedure
             returns, it places its return value in one (or a pair) of its in registers if it is an integer
             value or in floating-point register fO if it is a floating-point value. Then it restores
             the caller’s stack pointer by issuing a r e s t o r e instruction to move to the previous
             register window.
                  Figure 5.12 shows a typical stack frame layout for sparc . The 16 words of
             storage at sp through sp+60 are for use by the register-window spill trap handler,
             which stores the contents of the current window’s ins and locals there. Because of
             this, sp must always point to a valid spill area; it is modified only by the indivisible
             sav e and r e s t o r e instructions. The former can be used to advance to a new window
             and to allocate a new stack frame at once and the latter reverses this process. The
             word at sp+64 is used to return structures and unions to the caller. It is set up by the
             caller with the address of the area to receive the value.
            Section 5.6             Procedure Prologues, Epilogues, C alls, and Returns                      125


                Caller’s window




                                             r7 (g7)
                                                  •           g lo b a ls

                                             rl       (g l)

                                             rO (gO)          0

FIG. 5.11   spa r c   r e g iste r w in d o w s fo r th re e su c c e s s iv e p r o c e d u r e s .



                  Th e first six w o rd s o f integer argu m en ts are p asse d in registers. Succeedin g a rg u ­
            m ents are p asse d in the stack fram e. If it sh ou ld be necessary to traverse a variable-
            length argu m ent list, the entry-point code stores the first six argu m en ts beginning at
            sp + 6 8 . The area beginning at sp + 9 2 is used to hold ad d itio n al argu m en ts an d tem ­
            p oraries and to store the glo b al and floatin g-point registers when they need to be
            saved. F or o u r exam p le, b in Figure 5 .1 2 is 3 2 , so the size o f the entire stack fram e
            is 148 bytes.
                  Exercise 5 .6 requ ests th at you p rodu ce co de for a procedu re call, p rologu e,
            p aram eter use, ep ilogue, an d return fo r this m odel.
126            Run-Tim e Su p port



                        fp
                    fp -4         Static link
                    fp -8
                                  Local variables
                                  (four words)
                   fp -2 0
               sp+92+b
                                  Temporaries, global
                                  and floating-point
                                  register save area,
                                  arguments 7 ,8 ,...
                   sp+ 9 2
                   sp + 8 8
                                  Storage for arguments
                                  1 through 6
                   sp+ 6 8
                   sp + 6 4       s/u return pointer
                   sp+60
                                  Register window
                                  save area
                                  (16 words)
                        sp


   FIG. 5.12   Structure of the stack frame for the procedure-calling example with register windows
               (s/u means structure or union).




               4              Static link
               0              Procedure’s address

   FIG. 5.13   A procedure descriptor containing a procedure’s address and its static link.



5 .6 .4        Procedure-Valued Variables
               Calling a procedure that is the value of a variable requires special care in setting
               up its environment. If the target procedure is local, it must be passed a static link
               that is appropriate for it. This is best handled by making the value of the variable
               not be the address of the procedure’s code, but rather a pointer to a procedure
               descriptor that includes the code address and the static link. We show such a de­
               scriptor in Figure 5.13. Given this descriptor design, the “ call” code, regardless of
               the param eter-passing model, must be modified to get the static link and address
               of the called routine from the descriptor. To call the procedure, we load the address
               of the procedure into a register, load the static link into the appropriate register, and
               perform a register-based call. Alternately, since this code sequence is short and in­
               variant, we could make one copy of it, do all calls to procedure variables by calling
               it, and replace the register-based call that terminates it by a register-based branch,
               since the correct return address is the one used to call this code sequence.
     Section 5.7    Code Sharing and Position-Independent Code                           127


     Code Sharing and Position-Independent Code
     We have implicitly assumed above that a running program is a self-contained
     process, except possibly for calls to operating system services, i.e., any library rou­
     tines that are called are linked statically (before execution) with the user’s code, and
     all that needs to be done to enable execution is to load the executable image of the
     program into memory, to initialize the environment as appropriate to the operating
     system’s standard programming model, and to call the program’s main procedure
     with the appropriate arguments. There are several drawbacks to this model, hav­
     ing to do with space utilization and the time at which users’ programs and libraries
     are bound together, that can all be solved by using so-called shared libraries that
     are loaded and linked dynamically on demand during execution and whose code is
     shared by all the programs that reference them. The issues, presented as advantages
     of the shared library model, are as follows:

1.   A shared library need exist in the file system as only a single copy, rather than as part
     of each executable program that uses it.
2.   A shared library’s code need exist in memory as only one copy, rather than as part
     of every executing program that uses it.
3.   Should an error be discovered in the implementation of a shared library, it can be
     replaced with a new version, as long as it preserves the library’s interface, without re­
     quiring programs that use it to be relinked—an already executing program continues
     to use the copy of the library that was present in the file system when it demanded
     it, but new invocations of that program and others use the new copy.

     Note that linking a program with a nonshared library typically results in acquir­
     ing only the routines the program calls, plus the transitive closure of routines they
     call, rather than the whole library, but this usually does not result in a large space
     savings—especially for large, complex libraries such as those that implement win­
     dowing or graphics systems—and spreading this effect over all programs that link
     with a given library almost always favors shared libraries.
          A subtle issue is the need to keep the semantics of linking the same, as much as
     possible, as with static linking. The most important component of this is being able
     to determine before execution that the needed routines are present in the library, so
     that one can indicate whether dynamic linking will succeed, i.e., whether undefined
     and/or multiply defined external symbols will be encountered. This functionality is
     obtained by providing, for each shared library, a table of contents that lists its entry
     points and external symbols and those used by each routine in it (see Figure 5.14
     for an example). The first column lists entry points and externally known names in
     this shared library and the second and third columns list entry points and externals
     they reference and the shared libraries they are located in. The pre-execution linking
     operation then merely checks the tables of contents corresponding to the libraries
     to be linked dynamically, and so can report the same undefined symbols that static
     linking would. The run-time dynamic linker is then guaranteed to fail if and only
     if the pre-execution static linker would. Still, some minor differences may be seen
128           Run-Time Support


              Entry Points and     Shared        Entry Points and
              External Symbols     Library       External Symbols
              Provided             Used          Used
              entry1               lib rary l    externl
                                                 entry2
                                   lib rary 2    entry3
              entry2               lib rary l    entry1
                                   lib rary 2    entry4
                                                 entry5
              externl

  FIG. 5.14 An example of a shared library’s table of contents.

              when one links a dynamic library ahead of a static library, when both were originally
              linked statically.
                    Also, the code that is shared need not constitute a library in the sense in which
              that term has traditionally been used. It is merely a unit that the programmer chooses
              to link in at run time, rather than in advance of it. In the remainder of this section,
              we call the unit a shared object rather than a shared library, to reflect this fact.
                    Shared objects do incur a small performance impact when a program is running
              alone, but on a multiprogrammed system, this impact may be balanced entirely or
              nearly so by the reduced working set size, which results in better paging and cache
              performance. The performance impact has two sources, namely, the cost of run-time
              linking and the fact that shared objects must consist of position-independent code,
              i.e., code that can be loaded at different addresses in different programs, and each
              shared object’s private data must be allocated one copy per linked program, resulting
              in somewhat higher overhead to access it.
                    We next consider the issues and non-issues involved in supporting shared ob­
              jects. Position independence must be achieved so that each user of a shared object
              is free to map it to any address in memory, possibly subject to an alignment condi­
              tion such as the page size, since programs may be of various sizes and may demand
              shared objects in any order. Accessing local variables within a shared object is not an
              issue, since they are either in registers or in an area accessed by means of a register,
              and so are private to each process. Accessing global variables is an issue, since they
              are often placed at absolute rather than register-relative addresses. Calling a rou­
              tine in a shared object is an issue, since one does not know until the routine has been
              loaded what address to use for it. This results in four problems that need to be solved
              to make objects position-independent and hence sharable, namely, (1) how control
              is passed within an object, (2) how an object addresses its own external variables,
              (3) how control is passed between objects, and (4) how an object addresses external
              variables belonging to other objects.
                    In most systems, transferring control within an object is easy, since they provide
              program-counter-relative (i.e., position-based) branches and calls. Even though the
Section 5.7        Code Sharing and Position-Independent Code                        129


object as a whole needs to be compiled in such a way as to be positioned at any
location when it is loaded, the relative offsets of locations within it are fixed at
compile time, so PC-relative control transfers are exactly what is needed. If no PC-
relative call is provided by the architecture, it can be simulated by a sequence of
instructions that constructs the address of a call’s target from its offset from the
current point, as shown below.
     For an instance of a shared object to address its own external variables, it needs
a position-independent way to do so. Since processors do not generally provide PC-
relative loads and stores, a different technique must be used. The most common
approach uses a so-called global offset table, or GOT, that initially contains offsets
of external symbols within a so-called dynamic area that resides in the object’s data
space. When the object is dynamically linked, the offsets in the GOT are turned
into absolute addresses within the current process’s data space. It only remains for
procedures that reference externals to gain addressability to the GOT. This is done
by a code sequence such as the following lir code:
                  gp < - G 0 T _ o ff - 4
                  c a ll  n e x t ,r 3 1
    n e x t:      gP     gp + r3 1

where G0T_of f is the address of the GOT relative to the instruction that uses it. The
code sets the global pointer gp to point to the base of the GOT. Now the procedure
can access external variables by means of their addresses in the GOT; for example,
to load the value of an external integer variable named a, whose address is stored at
offset a_of f in the GOT, into register r3, it would execute
    r 2 <r- [ g p + a _ o ff ]
    r 3 < - [r 2 ]

The first instruction loads the address of a into r2 and the second loads its value into
r3. Note that for this to work, the GOT can be no larger than the non-negative part
of the range of the offset in load and store instructions. For a Rise, if a larger range
is needed, additional instructions must be generated before the first load to set the
high-order part of the address, as follows:
    r3   <r- h ig h _ p a r t ( a _ o f f )
    r2   <r- gp + r 3
    r2   <r-   [r 2 + lo w _ p a r t ( a _ o f f ) ]
    r3   <-    [r 2 ]

where h ig h .p a rt ( ) and lo w .p art ( ) provide the upper and lower bits of their ar­
gument, divided into two contiguous pieces. For this reason, compilers may provide
two options for generating position-independent code—one with and one without
the additional instructions.
     Transferring control between objects is not as simple as within an object, since
the objects’ relative positions are not known at compile time, or even when the
program is initially loaded. The standard approach is to provide, for each routine
called from an object, a stub that is the target of calls to that routine. The stub is
placed in the calling object’s data space, not its read-only code space, so it can be
130   Run-Time Support


      modified when the called routine is invoked during execution, causing the routine to
      be loaded (if this is its first use in the called object) and linked.
            There are several possible strategies for how the stubs work. For example, each
      stub might contain the name of the routine it corresponds to and a call to the
      dynamic linker, which would replace the beginning of the stub with a call to the
      actual routine. Alternately, given a register-relative branch instruction, we could
      organize the stubs into a structure called a procedure linkage table, or PLT, reserve
      the first stub to call the dynamic linker, the second one to identify the calling object,
      and the others to each construct the index of the relocation information for the
      routine the stub is for, and branch to the first one (thus invoking the dynamic linker).
      This approach allows the stubs to be resolved lazily, i.e., only as needed, and versions
      of it are used in several dynamic linking systems. For sparc, assuming that we have
      stubs for three procedures, the form of the PLT before loading and after the first
      and third routines have been dynamically linked are as shown in Figure 5.15(a) and
      (b), respectively. Before loading, the first two PLT entries are empty and each of the
      others contains instructions that compute a shifted version of the entry’s index in the
      PLT and branch to the first entry. During loading of the shared object into memory,
      the dynamic linker sets the first two entries as shown in Figure 5.15(b)—the second
      one identifies the shared object and the first creates a stack frame and invokes the
      dynamic linker—and leaves the others unchanged, as shown by the .PLT3 entry.
      When the procedure, say f ( ), corresponding to entry 2 in the PLT is first called,
      the stub at .PLT2—which still has the form shown in Figure 5.15(a) at this point—
      is invoked; it puts the shifted index computed by the se th i in g l and branches to
       . PLTO, which calls the dynamic linker. The dynamic linker uses the object identifier
      and the value in g l to obtain the relocation information for f ( ), and modifies entry
       .PLT2 correspondingly to create a jmpl to the code for f ( ) that discards the return
      address (note that the se th i that begins the next entry is executed—harmlessly—in
      the delay slot of the jmpl). Thus, a call from this object to the PLT entry for f ( )
      henceforth branches to the beginning of the code for f ( ) with the correct return
      address.
            Accessing another object’s external variables is essentially identical to accessing
      one’s own, except that one uses that object’s GOT.
            A somewhat subtle issue is the ability to form the address of a procedure at run
      time, to store it as the value of a variable, and to compare it to another procedure
      address. If the address of a procedure in a shared object, when computed within the
      shared object, is the address of its first instruction, while its address when computed
      from outside the object is the address of the first instruction in a stub for it, then we
      have broken a feature found in C and several other languages. The solution is simple:
      both within shared code and outside it, we use procedure descriptors (as described in
      the preceding section) but we modify them to contain the PLT entry address rather
      than the code’s address, and we extend them to include the address of the GOT for
      the object containing the callee. The code sequence used to perform a call through a
      procedure variable needs to save and restore the GOT pointer, but the result is that
      such descriptors can be used uniformly as the values of procedure variables, and
      comparisons of them work correctly.
             Section 5.8     Symbolic and Polymorphic Language Support                            131


              PLTO: unimp                          .PLTO: save sp ,-6 4 ,sp
                    unimp                                 c a ll dyn_linker
                    unimp                                 nop
              PLT1: unimp                          .PLT1: .word object_id
                    unimp                                 unimp
                    unimp                                 unimp
              PLT2: seth i (.-.P L T 0 ),g l       .PLT2: seth i ( . - . PLTO),gl
                    b a,a .PLTO                           seth i °/0h i ( f ) ,g l
                    nop                                   jmpl gl+°/0lo ( f ) ,r0
              PLT3: seth i (.-.P L T 0 ),g l       .PLT3: seth i ( . - . PLTO),gl
                    b a,a .PLTO                           b a ,a .PLTO
                    nop                                   nop
              PLT4: seth i (.-.P L T 0 ),g l       .PLT4: seth i ( .-.PLTO ),gl
                    b a,a .PLTO                           seth i /#,hi (h) ,g l
                    nop                                   jmpl gl+7,lo(h) ,r0
                    nop                                   nop

             (a)                                   (b)
 FIG. 5.15 sparc PLT (a) before loading, and (b) after two routines have been dynamically linked.


5.8          Sym bolic and Polymorphic Lan guage Support
             M ost of the compiler material in this book is devoted to languages that are well
             suited to compilation: languages that have static, compile-time type systems, that do
             not allow the user to incrementally change the code, and that typically make much
             heavier use of stack storage than heap storage.
                  In this section, we briefly consider the issues involved in compiling program s
             written in more dynamic languages, such as l isp , M L, Prolog, Scheme, se l f ,
             Smalltalk, sn o b o l , Java, and so on, that are generally used to manipulate symbolic
             data and have run-time typing and polymorphic operations. We refer the reader
             to [Lee91] for a more expansive treatment of some of these issues. There are five
             main problems in producing efficient code for such a language, beyond those con­
             sidered in the remainder of this book, namely,

        1.   an efficient way to deal with run-time type checking and function polymorphism,
        2.   fast implementations of the language’s basic operations,
        3.   fast function calls and ways to optimize them to be even faster,
        4.   heap storage management, and
        5.   efficient ways of dealing with incremental changes to running programs.

                  Run-time type checking is required by most of these languages because they
             assign types to data, not to variables. Thus, when we encounter at compile time an
             operation of the form “ a + b ” , or “ (p lu s a b) ” , or however it might be written in
             a particular language, we do not, in general, have any way of knowing whether the
132           Run-Time Support


              operation being performed is addition of integers, floating-point numbers, rationals,
              or arbitrary-precision reals; whether it might be concatenation of lists or strings;
              or whether it is some other operation determined by the types of its two operands.
              So we need to compile code that includes type information for constants and that
              checks the types of operands and branches to the appropriate code to implement
              each operation. In general, the most common cases that need to be detected and
              dispatched on quickly are integer arithmetic and operations on one other data type,
              namely, list cells in lisp and ML, strings in snobo l , and so on.
                   Architectural support for type checking is minimal in most systems, sparc, how­
              ever, provides tagged add and subtract instructions that, in parallel with performing
              an add or subtract, check that the low-order two bits of both 32-bit operands are
              zeros. If they are not, either a trap or a condition code setting can result, at the user’s
              option, and the result is not written to the target register. Thus, by putting at least
              part of the tag information in the two low-order bits of a word, one gets a very in­
              expensive way to check that an add or subtract has integer operands. Some other
              Rises, such as mips and pa-risc , support somewhat slower type checking by pro­
              viding compare-immediate-and-branch instructions. Such instructions can be used
              to check the tag of each operand in a single instruction, so the overhead is only two
              to four cycles, depending on the filling of branch-delay slots.
                   The low-order two bits of a word can also be used to do type checking in sparc
              for at least one more data type, such as list cells in lisp . Assuming that list cells are
              doublewords, if one uses the address of the first word plus 3 as the pointer to a list
              cell (say in register r l), then word accesses to the car and edr fields use addresses
              of the form r l - 3 and r l + 1, and the addresses are valid if and only if the pointers
              used in loads or stores to access them have a 3 in the low-order two bits, i.e., a tag
              of 3 (see Figure 5.16). Note that this leaves two other tag values (1 and 2) available
              for another type and an indicator that more detailed type information needs to be
              accessed elsewhere.
                   The odd-address facet of the tagging scheme can be used in several other R i s e
              architectures. Other efficient means of tagging data are discussed in Chapter 1
              of [Lee91].
                   The work discussed in Section 9.6 concerns, among other things, software
              techniques for assigning, where possible, types to variables in languages in which,
              strictly speaking, only data objects have types.
                   Fast function calling is essential for these languages because they strongly en­
              courage dividing programs up into many small functions. Polymorphism affects
              function-calling overhead because it causes determination at run time of the code
              to invoke for a particular call, based on the types of its arguments. Rises are ideal



              rl    503

                                                    edr
                          500              504
  FIG. 5.16 A lisp list cell and a sparc tagged pointer to it.
Section 5.9    Wrap-Up                                                              133


in this regard, since they generally provide fast function calls by branch-and-link in­
structions, pass arguments in registers, and, in most cases, provide quick ways to
dispatch on the type of one or more arguments. One can move the type of an argu­
ment into a register, convert it to an offset of the proper size, and branch into a table
of branches to code that implements a function for the corresponding type.
     Dynamic and symbolic languages generally make heavy use of heap storage,
largely because the objects they are designed to operate on are very dynamic in size
and shape. Thus, it is essential to have a very efficient mechanism for allocating heap
storage and for recovering it. Storage recovery is uniformly by garbage collection,
not by explicit freeing. The most efficient method of garbage collection for general
use for such languages is generation scavenging, which is based on the principle that
the longer an object lives, the longer it is likely to live.
     Finally, the ability to incrementally change the code of a running program is a
characteristic of most of these languages. This is usually implemented in compiled
implementations by a combination of run-time compilation and indirect access to
functions. If the name of a function in a running program is the address of a cell
that contains the address of its code, as in the procedure descriptors discussed
in Sections 5.6 and 5.7, then one can change the code and its location, at least
when it is not active, by changing the address in the indirect cell to point to the
new code for the function. Having the compiler available at run time also enables
on-the-fly recompilation, i.e., the ability to recompile an existing routine, perhaps
because one had previously cached a compiled copy of the routine that assumed
that its arguments had particular types and that information no longer applies. This
approach was used to good advantage in Deutsch and Schiffman’s implementation
of Smalltalk-80 for a Motorola M68000-based system [DeuS84] and has been used
repeatedly since in other polymorphic-language implementations.
     The above discussion only scratches the surface of the issues involved in de­
signing an efficient implementation of a dynamic language. See Section 5.10 for
references to further sources in this area.




Wrap-Up
In this chapter, we have reviewed the basic issues in supporting the concepts that
are commonly embodied in higher-level languages at run time, including data types
and approaches to representing them efficiently at run time, storage allocation and
addressing methods, visibility and scope rules, register usage and elementary meth­
ods for managing it, the structure of a single procedure’s stack frame and the overall
organization of the run-time stack, and the issues involved in supporting parameter
passing and procedure calling, entry, exit, and return.
    Since most of this material is covered well in introductory texts on compilers,
our purpose has been to remind the reader of the issues and of appropriate ways of
handling them and to provide references for further reading. More advanced con­
cepts, such as position-independent code and support for dynamic and polymorphic
languages, are discussed in the final sections in greater detail.
134    Run-Time Support


           The existence of Application Binary Interface standards for many architectures
       determines how some of these issues must be handled (if it is necessary for a project
       to conform to the standard), and thus eases the task of achieving interoperability
       with other software.
            In the latter sections of the chapter, we have discussed issues that are generally
       not covered in introductory courses at all. In Section 5.7, we provided a detailed
       account of how to support code sharing between processes, by means of position-
       independent code and dynamic linking. Finally, in Section 5.8, we surveyed the issues
       in supporting dynamic and polymorphic languages, a subject that could easily take
       another whole volume if it were covered in detail.




5.10   Further Reading
       The Unix System V ABI documents referred to at the beginning of this chapter are
       the general specification [uNix90a], and its processor-specific supplements for, e.g.,
       sparc [unix 90 c], the Motorola 88000 [uNix90b], and the Intel 386 architecture
       family [unix 93]. Hewlett-Packard’s [HewP91] specifies the stack structure and call­
       ing conventions for pa-r isc .
             The Unicode specification, which encompasses 16-bit character representations
       for the Latin, Cyrillic, Arabic, Hebrew, and Korean (Hangul) alphabets; the al­
       phabets of several languages spoken in India; Chinese and Kanji characters; and
       Katakana and Hiragana is [Unic90].
             The idea of using thunks to compute the addresses of call-by-name parameters
       is first described in [Inge61].
             Weicker’s statistics on the average number of arguments passed to a procedure
       are given in [Weic84], along with the code for the original version of the dhrystone
       benchmark.
             Statistics on the power of register windows to reduce the number of loads and
       stores executed in a R i s e architecture are given in [CmeK91].
             [GinL87] gives an exposition of the advantages of shared libraries or objects
       and an overview of their implementation in a specific operating system, SunOS for
       sparc . It also describes the minor differences that may be observed between loading
       a program statically and dynamically.
             The symbolic and polymorphic languages mentioned in Section 5.8 are described
       in detail in [Stee84] (lisp ), [MilT90] (ML), [CloM87] (Prolog), [CliR91] (Scheme),
       [UngS91] (self ), [Gold84] (Smalltalk), [GriP68] (sn o bo l ), and [GosJ96] (Java).
             The generation scavenging approach to garbage collection is described in
       [Unga87] and [Lee89].
             The first published description of on-the-fly compilation is Deutsch and Schiff-
       man’s implementation of Smalltalk-80 [DeuS84] for a Motorola M68000-based
       system. Other issues in implementing dynamic and polymorphic languages, such as
       inferring control- and data-flow information, are discussed in [Lee91] and in numer­
       ous papers in the proceedings of the annual programming languages and functional
       programming conferences.
             Section 5.11     Exercises                                                            135


5.11         Exercises
        5.1 Suppose that lir contained neither byte nor halfword loads and stores, (a) Write an
            efficient lir routine that moves a byte string from the byte address in register r l to
            the byte address in r2 with the length in r3. (b) Now assume the C convention that
            a string is terminated by a null character, i.e., 0x00, and rewrite the routines to move
            such strings efficiently.

        5.2 Determine how one of the compilers in your computing environment divides up
            register usage. This may require simply reading a manual, or it may require a series
            of experiments.

        5.3 Suppose we have a call f ( i , x , j ) , with parameters passed by value, where the first
            and third parameters are integers and the second is a single-precision floating-point
            value. The call is executed in the procedure g ( ), which is nested within the same
            scope as f ( ), so they have the same static link. Write lir code that implements
            the procedure-calling and return handshake, assuming that parameters are passed in
            registers with a flat register file, as discussed in Section 5.6.1. The answer should have
            five parts, as follows: (1) the call, (2) f ( ) ’s prologue, (3) use of the first parameter,
            (4) f ( ) ’s epilogue, and (5) the return point.

        5.4 Write either lir code or Intel 386 architecture family assembly language for the
            preceding exercise, assuming that parameters are passed on the run-time stack, as
            discussed in Section 5.6.2.

        5.5 Write lir code for the preceding exercise, assuming that parameters are passed in
            registers with register windowing, as discussed in Section 5.6.3.

  ADV 5.6 Devise a language extension to Pascal or a similar language that requires (some)
          stack frames to be preserved, presumably in heap storage, independent of the origi­
          nal calling conventions. Why might such a language extension be useful?

        5.7 Write a lir version of the routine a l l o c a ( ) described in Section 5.3.

        5.8 Write a (single) program that demonstrates that all the parameter-passing disciplines
            are distinct. That is, write a program in a language of your choice and show that
            using each of the five parameter-passing methods results in different output from
            your program.

        5.9 Describe (or write in ican ) a procedure to be used at run time to distinguish which
            of a series of methods with the same name is to be invoked in Java, based on the
            overloading and overriding found in the language.

 ADV 5.10 Write sample code for the procedure-calling handshake for a language with call by
          name. Specifically, write lir code for a call f ( n ,a [ n ] ) where both parameters are
          called by name.

       5.11 Describe and give code examples for an approach to handling shared objects that
            uses only a GOT and no PLTs.
136           Run-Time Support


 RSCH 5.12 Explore the issues involved in supporting a polymorphic language by mixing on-the-
           fly compilation (discussed briefly in Section 5.8) with interpretation of an interme­
           diate code. The issues include, for example, transfers of control between interpreted
           and compiled code (in both directions), how to tell when it is worthwhile to com­
           pile a routine, and how to tell when to recompile a routine or to switch back to
           interpreting it.
                                                                         CHAPTER 6




      Producing Code Generators
                  Automatically




     I
         n this chapter, we explore briefly the issues involved in generating machine or
         assembly code from intermediate code, and then delve into automatic methods
         for generating code generators from machine descriptions.
         There are several sorts of issues to consider in generating code, including
1.   the register, addressing, and instruction architecture of the target machine,
2.   software conventions that must be observed,
3.   a method for binding variables to memory locations or so-called symbolic registers,
4.   the structure and characteristics of the intermediate language,
5.   the implementations of intermediate-language operators that don’t correspond di­
     rectly to target-machine instructions,
6.   a method for translating from intermediate code to machine code, and
7.   whether to target assembly language or a directly linkable or relocatable version of
     machine code.
     The importance of and choices made for some of these issues vary according to
     whether we are writing a compiler for a single language and target architecture; for
     several languages for one architecture; for one language for several architectures; or
     for several languages and several architectures. Also, it is usually prudent to take
     into account that a given compiler may need to be adapted to support additional
     source languages and machine architectures over its lifetime.
         If we are certain that our job is to produce compilers for a single architecture,
     there may be no advantage in using automatic methods to generate a code generator
     from a machine description. In such a case, we would use a hand-crafted approach,
     such as those described in the typical introductory compiler text. If, on the other
     hand, we expect to be producing compilers for several architectures, generating

                                                                                       137
138   Producing Code Generators Automatically


      code generators automatically from machine descriptions may be of great value. It
      is generally easier to write or modify a machine description than to produce a code
      generator from scratch or to adapt an existing code generator to a new architecture.
           The machine architecture needs to be understood for obvious reasons—although
      some reasons may not be so obvious. It is the target that the code we generate must
      aim for—if we miss it, the code simply will not run. Less obviously, there may not
      be a good match between some language features and the target architecture. For
      example, if we must handle 64-bit integer arithmetic on a machine with a 32-bit
      word length, we need to write open or closed routines (i.e., in-line code or subrou­
      tines) to perform the 64-bit operations. A similar situation arises almost universally
      for complex numbers. If the machine has PC-relative conditional branches with a
      displacement too short to cover the sizes of programs, we need to devise a means
      for branching to locations far enough away to cover the class of expected programs,
      perhaps by branching on the negation of a condition around an unconditional jump
      with a broader range.
           The software conventions have a similar importance. They must be designed to
      support the source language’s features and to coincide with any published standard
      that must be adhered to, such as an Application Binary Interface (ABI) definition (see
      the beginning of Chapter 5), or the generated code will not meet its requirements.
      Understanding the details of the software conventions and how to implement code
      that satisfies them efficiently is essential to producing efficient code.
           The structure of the intermediate language we are working from is not essential
      to determining whether we are generating correct code, but it is a major determining
      factor in selecting the method to use. There are code-generation approaches designed
      to work on DAGs, trees, quadruples, triples, Polish-prefix code, and several other
      forms, including several different representations of control structure.
           Whether to target assembly language or a relocatable binary form of object
      code is mostly a question of convenience and the importance of compilation-time
      performance. Generating assembly code requires that we include an assembly phase
      in the compilation process, and hence requires additional time (both for running the
      assembler and for writing and reading the assembly code), but it makes the output
      of the code generator easier to read and check, and it allows us to leave to the
      assembler the handling of such issues as generating a branch to a currently unknown
      future location in the code by producing a symbolic label now and leaving it to the
      assembler to locate it in the code later. If, on the other hand, we generate linkable
      code directly, we generally need a way to output a symbolic form of the code for
      debugging anyway, although it need not be full assembly language and it might be
      generated from the object code by a disassembler, as IBM does for its power and
      PowerPC compilers (see Section 21.2.2).


6.1   Introduction to Automatic Generation
      o f Code Generators
      While hand-crafted code generators are effective and fast, they have the disadvantage
      of being implemented by hand and so are much more difficult to modify and port
      than a code generator that is automatically generated. Several approaches have been
Section 6.2    A Syntax-Directed Technique                                           139


developed that construct a code generator from a machine description. We describe
three of them to varying levels of detail here. All begin with a low-level intermediate
code that has addressing computations exposed.
    In all three cases, the code generator does pattern matching on trees, although
that will not be immediately apparent in the first two—they both work on a Polish-
prefix intermediate representation. Of course, as noted in Section 4.9.4, Polish
prefix results from a preorder tree traversal, so the tree is simply hidden in a linear
presentation.


A Syntax-Directed Technique
Our first approach to generating a code generator from a machine description is
known as the Graham-Glanville method after its originators. It represents machine
operations by rules similar to those in a context-free grammar, along with cor­
responding machine instruction templates. When a rule matches a substring of a
Polish-prefix intermediate-code string (which represents a preorder traversal of a se­
quence of trees) and its associated semantic constraints are met, the part matched is
replaced by an instantiation of the left-hand symbol of the rule and a corresponding
instantiation of the instruction template is emitted.
     A Graham-Glanville code generator consists of three components, namely,
intermediate-language transformations, the pattern matcher, and instruction gen­
eration. The first transforms, as necessary, the output of a compiler front end into
a form suitable for pattern matching; for example, source-language operators not
representable by machine operations might be transformed into subroutine calls,
and calls are transformed into sequences of explicit state-changing instructions. The
second component actually does the pattern matching, determining what sequence
of reductions is appropriate to consume an input string of intermediate code. The
third, which is meshed with the second in its execution, actually generates an appro­
priate sequence of instructions and performs register allocation. In the remainder of
this section, we concentrate on the pattern-matching phase and, to a lesser degree,
on instruction generation.
     As an example, consider the subset of lir instructions in Figure 6.1(a), where
each argument position is qualified with a number that is used to match intermediate-
code substrings with code-generation rules and instruction templates. The corre­
sponding rules and sparc instruction templates are shown in Figure 6.1(b) and (c).
In the figure, “ r.w ” denotes a register, “ k.w” a constant, and “ e ” the empty string.
The numbers are used both to coordinate matching with code emission and to ex­
press syntactic restrictions in the rules—for example, if the first and second operands
in a string must be the same register for the match to succeed, then they would both
have the same number.
     We use “ T” to denote a load,        to denote a store, and mov to denote a register-
to-register move in the Polish-prefix code.
     As an example, suppose we have the lir code shown in Figure 6.2. Then,
assuming r3 and r4 are dead at the end of this code sequence, there is no need to
include them explicitly in the tree representation, as shown in Figure 6.3, but we do
need to retain r l and r2. The resulting Polish-prefix form is
140              Producing Code Generators Autom atically


                 r .2 <- r .1             r .2      r .l               or    r . 1 ,0 ,r.2
                 r .2 <- k .l             r .2 => k .l                 or    0 ,k .1, r .2
                 r .2 <- r . l            r . 2 ==> mov r . 2 r . l    or    r . 1 ,0 ,r.2

                 r .3 <- r . l + r .2     r .3 => + r . l r .2         add r . l , r . 2 , r . 3
                 r . 3 <- r . l + k.2     r .3 => + r . l k.2          add r . l , k . 2 , r . 3
                 r .3 <- k .2 + r . l     r .3 => + k.2 r . l          add r . l , k . 2 , r . 3

                 r .3 <- r . l - r .2     r .3 => - r . l r .2         sub r . l , r . 2 , r . 3
                 r .3 <- r . l - k.2      r .3 => - r . l k.2          sub r . l , k . 2 , r . 3

                 r . 3 <- [r .l+ r .2 ]   r .3 => t + r . l r .2       Id     [ r . l , r . 2 ] , r .3
                 r .3 <- [r.l+ k .2 ]     r .3 => t + r . l k.2        Id     [ r . l , k . 2 ] , r .3
                 r . 2 <- [ r .l ]        € ==> t r .2 r . l           Id     [ r .l] ,r .2

                 [r ,2 + r . 3]    r .l   € => <- + r .2 r .3 r . l    St    r.l,[r.2,r.3]
                 [r.2+k.1] <- r.l         € = > < - + r.2 k.l r.l      St    r.l, [r.2,k.l]
                 [r2] <--r.l              € => <- r.2 r.l              St    r.l,[r.2]
                 (a)                      (b)                          (c)
      FIG* 6.1   (a) lir instructions, (b) Graham-Glanville machine-description rules, and (c)
                 corresponding sparc instruction templates.


                 r2     [r8]
                 r l <- [r8+4]
                 r3 <- r2 + r l
                 [r8+8] <- r3
                 r4     rl - 1
                 [r8+4] <- r4
      FIG. 6.2 A lir code sequence for Graham-Glanville code generation.


                       T r2 r8 <- + r8 8 + r2 T rl + r8 4 <- + r8 4 - rl 1

                 The pattern matching that occurs during its parsing is shown in Figure 6.4, along
                 with the sparc instructions generated for it. The underlining indicates the portion
                 of the string that is matched, and the symbol underneath it shows what replaces
                 the matched substring; for loads and arithmetic operators, the resulting register is
                 determined by the register allocator used during code generation.


6.2.1            The Code Generator
                 The code generator is essentially an S L R (l) parser that performs the usual shift
                 and reduce actions, but that emits machine instructions instead of parse trees or
                 intermediate code. In essence, the parser recognizes a language whose productions
                 are the machine-description rules with “ e ” replaced by a nonterminal N and the
                 additional production S => N *. There are, however, a few important differences from
                 SLR parsing.
           Section 6.2    A Syntax-Directed Technique                                                     141

                                            <7
                                             -




                 t                add                 add


           r2        r8      r8         8        r2         T                    add                sub


                                                      rl         add       r8                 rl


                                                            r8         4

FIG. 6.3 Trees corresponding to the lir code sequence in Figure 6.2.




                                                                           1 - rl 1
                                                                           Id     [r8,0],r2
           <- + r8 8 + r2 T rl + r8 4 <- + r8 4 - rl 1
                           rl                          Id                              [r8,4],rl
           <- + r8 8 + r2 rl <- + r8 4 - rl 1
                      r3                               add                             r2,rl,r3
           <r- + r8 4 r3 <- + r8 4 - rl 1
           e                                           St                              r3, [r8,4]
           <r- + r8 4 - rl 1
                      r4                               sub                             rl,1,r4
           <r- + r8 4 r4
           €                                           St                              r4,[r8,4]
           (a)                                                             (b)
FIG. 6*4 (a) Parsing process and (b) emitted instructions for the trees in Figure 6.3.




                Rules with “ e ” on the left-hand side are allowed, and the “ e ” is treated as a
           nonterminal symbol. Unlike in parsing, machine-description grammars are almost
           always ambiguous. The ambiguities are resolved in two ways. One is by favoring
           shift actions over reduce actions (i.e., the algorithm is greedy or maximal munch)
           and longer reductions over shorter ones, so as to match the longest possible string.
           The other is by ordering the rules when the parsing tables are produced so that
           the code generator picks the first rule that matches when it performs a reduction
           during code generation. Thus, in specifying the rules, one can bias code generation
           to particular choices by ordering the rules in a particular way or by building a cost
           evaluation into the code generator.
142   Producing Code G enerators Autom atically


          The code-generation algorithm uses seven global data types, a stack, and two
      functions that are constructed by the code-generator generator, as follows:

          Vocab = Terminal u Nonterminal
          ExtVocab = Vocab u {•e 1,'$1}
          VocabSeq = sequence of Vocab
          ActionType = enum {Shift,Reduce,Accept,Error}
          II type of machine grammar rules
          Rule = record {It: Nonterminal u {'e'},
                         rt: VocabSeq}
          II type of parsing automaton items that make up its states
          Item = record {It: Nonterminal u {'e'},
                         rt: VocabSeq,
                         pos: integer}
          ActionRedn = ActionType x set of Item
          Stack: sequence of (integer u ExtVocab)
          Action: State x ExtVocab — > ActionRedn
          Next: State x ExtVocab — > State

      Note that the sets of terminal and nonterminal symbols in a machine grammar
      almost always have a nonempty intersection.
           The code generator takes as input a Polish-prefix intermediate-code string
      InterCode, which must be a sequence of members of Terminal. An element of type
      ActionRedn is a pair <<z,r> consisting of members a of ActionType and r in set of
      Item such that r ^ 0 if and only if a —Reduce. The algorithm is shown in Figure 6.5.
      Get .Symbol ( ) returns the first symbol in its argument, and Discard.Symbol( )
      removes that symbol.
           The function Emit_Instrs {reduction, left, right) selects a rule from among
      those encoded in reduction, emits one or more corresponding instructions using
      the information on the stack to instantiate the corresponding template, sets left to
      the instantiated symbol on the left-hand side of the rule used, and sets right to the
      length of the rule’s right-hand side. To understand why Emit.Instrs ( ) needs to use
      information on the stack to decide what instruction sequence to emit, consider the
      second rule in Figure 6.1. There is no problem with using it, as long as the constant
      matched by k . l fits into the 13-bit signed immediate field found in most s p a r c
      instructions. If it doesn’t fit, Emit.Instrs( ) needs to generate a sethi and an or
      to construct the constant in a register, followed by the corresponding three-register
      instruction given in the first rule in Figure 6.1. We can introduce this alternative into
      the rules by providing the additional rule and instruction template

          (empty)                  r.2 => k.l               sethi °/0hi(k. 1) ,r.2
                                                            or    °/0lo(k. 1) ,r.2,r.2

      However, we would still need to check the lengths of constant operands, since
      otherwise this rule would not be used when needed— it matches a shorter substring
      than does any rule that includes an operator and a constant operand, so we would
      always shift on finding a constant operand, rather than reduce.
          Section 6.2     A Syntax-Directed Technique         143

          procedure Generate(InterCode) returns boolean
             Intercode: in VocabSeq
          begin
             state := 0, right: integer
             action: ActionType
             reduction: set of Item
             left, lookahead: ExtVocab
             Stack := [0]
             lookahead := Lookahead(InterCode)
             while true do
                 action := ActionCstate,lookahead)11
                 reduction := ActionCstate,lookahead)12
                 case action of
          Shift:    Stack ®= [lookahead]
                    state := Next(state,lookahead)
                    Stack ®= [state]
                    Discard_Symbol(InterCode)
                    if InterCode = [] then
                         lookahead := '$'
                    else
                         lookahead := Get_Symbol(InterCode)
                    fi
          Reduce: Emit_Instrs(reduction,left,right)
                    for i := 1 to 2 * right do
                       Stack ©= -1
                    od
                    state := Stackl-1
                    if left *      then
                       Stack ®= [left]
                       state := Next(state,left)
                       Stack ®= [state]
                    fi
          Accept: return true
          Error:    return false
                 esac
              od
          end     II Generate

F IG . 6 .S The code-generation algorithm.
144               Producing Code Generators Automatically

                       A nother issue hidden in E m it _ I n s t r s ( ) is register allocation. It can be handled
                  by the m ethod described in Section 3 .6 , or preferably by assigning scalar variables
                  and tem poraries to an unlim ited set o f sym bolic registers that the register allocator
                  (see Section 16.3) will eventually assign to m achine registers or storage locations.


6.2.2             The Code-Generator Generator
                  The code-generator generator, show n in Figures 6.6 and 6 .7 , is based on the sets-
                  of-item s construction used in building S L R p arsing tables (where an item is a p ro­
                  duction in the gram m ar with a dot              in its right-hand side), but with several
                  m odifications. Items are represented by the global type Item declared above; an item
                  [/ => r\ . . . r\ • rz+i . . . rw] corresponds to the record < l t : / , r t : n . . . rn , p o s :/> .
                  The m ain routine G e n _ T a b le s( ) returns t r u e if the set o f rules in MGrammar is
                  uniform (see Figure 6.7) and all syntactic blocks (see Subsection 6.2.4) could be re­
                  paired; and f a l s e otherw ise. The global variables in Figure 6.6 are global to all the


                  MaxStateNo: integer
                  MGrammar: set of Rule
                  ItemSet: array [••] of set of Item

                  procedure Gen_Tables( ) returns boolean
                  begin
                      StateNo := 0: integer
                      unif: boolean
                      item: Item
                      rule: Rule
                      I| remove cycles of nonterminals from machine grammar
                      Elim_Chain_Loops( )
                      MaxStateNo := 0
                      I| generate action/next tables
                      ItemSet[0] := Closure({<lt:rule.It,rt:rule.rt,pos:0>
                         where rule e MGrammar & rule.lt = 'c'})
                     while StateNo ^ MaxStateNo do
                         Successors(StateNo)
                          I| process fails if some state is not uniform
                         if !Uniform(StateNo) then
                              return false
                         fi
                         StateNo += 1
                      od
                      II process fails if some syntactic blockage is not repairable
                     unif := Fix.Synt.Blocks( )
                     Action(0,'$') := <Accept,0>
                     return unif
                  end      II Gen.Tables

      FIG . 6.6   Constructing the S L R (l) parsing tables.
              Section 6.2       A Syntax-Directed Technique                                                     145

              procedure Successors(s)
                  s : in integer
              begin
                  Nextltems: set of Item
                  v: Vocab
                  x: ExtVocab
                  j: integer
                  item, iteml: Item
                  for each v e Vocab do
                      II if there is an item [x =>          in ItemSet [s] ,
                      I| set action to shift and compute next state
                      if Bitem e ItemSet [s] (v = item.rtl(item.pos+1)) then
                          Action(s,v) := <Shift,0>
                          Nextltems := Closure(Advance({iteml e Itemset[s]
                             where v =iteml.rtl(iteml.pos+1)}))
                          if 3j e integer (ItemSet [j] = Nextltems) then
                             Next(s,v) := j
                          else
                             MaxStateNo += 1
                             ItemSet[MaxStateNo] :* Nextltems
                             Next(s,v) := MaxStateNo
                          fi
                      II if there is an item [x      a*] in ItemSet[s],
                      II set action to reduce and compute the reduction
                      elif Bitem e ItemSet[s] (item.pos = Iitem.rt1+1) then
                          Reduction := {item e ItemSet [s] where item.pos = Iitem.rt1+1
                             & (item.lt =     V (v e Follow(item.It)
                             & Viteml e ItemSet[s] (iteml = item V Iiteml.rtI ^ litem.rtl
                                V iteml.pos ^ litem.rtl V v ^ Follow(iteml.It))))}
                          Action(s,v) := {Reduce,Reduction)
                      I| otherwise set action to error
                      else
                          Action(s,v) := {Error,0>
                      fi
                  od
              end        || Successors

F IG . 6 .6   (continued)


              routines in this section. Th e array Ite m S e t [ ] is indexed by state n um bers an d is
              used to hold the sets o f item s as they are con structed. V ocab is the v o cab u lary o f
              term inal an d nonterm inal sy m b ols that occurs in the rules. Like a p arser generator,
              the code-generator gen erator p roceed s by co n stru ctin g sets o f item s an d asso cia tin g
              each o f them with a state. T h e function S u c c e s s o r s ( ) co m p u tes the sets o f item s
              co rrespo n d in g to the su ccesso rs o f each state an d fills in the A c t io n ( ) an d N ext ( )
              values for each tran sition .
                   Th e functions E lim _ C h a in _ L o o p s( ) an d F i x _ S y n t .B l o c k s ( ) are described
              below. Th e function U n ifo rm ( ) determ ines w hether the set o f rules satisfies a
146                 Producing Code Generators Autom atically

                    procedure Uniform(s) returns boolean
                        s : in integer
                    begin
                        u, v, x: Vocab
                        item: Item
                        for each item e ItemSet[s] (item.pos ^ Iitem.rtI) do
                            if item.pos * 0 then
                               x := Parent(item.rtlitem.pos,item.rt)
                               if Left_Child(item.rtlitem.pos,item.rt) then
                                  for each u e Vocab do
                                     if Action(s,u) = <Error,0>
                                        & (Left_First(x,u) V Right_First(x,u)) then
                                        return false
                                     fi
                                  od
                               fi
                            fi
                        od
                        return true
                    end      II Uniform

                    procedure Closure(S) returns set of Item
                        S: in set of Item
                    begin
                        OldS: set of Item
                        item, s: Item
                        repeat
                            II compute the set of items [x => a v #/J]
                            I| such that [x =>        is in S
                           OldS := S
                           5 u= {item e Item where 3s e S (s.pos < Is.rtl
                               & s.(s.pos+l) e Nonterminal
                               & item.lt = s.(s.pos+l) & item.pos = 0)}
                        until S = OldS
                        return S
                    end      |I Closure

                    procedure Advance(S) returns set of Item
                        S: in set of Item
                    begin
                        s, item: Item
                        I| advance the dot one position in each item
                        II that does not have the dot at its right end
                        return {item e Item where 3s e S (item.lt = s.lt
                           6 s.pos ^ Is.rtl & item.rt = s.rt
                           & item.pos = s.pos+1)}
                    end     II Advance

      F IG . 6 .7   The functions U n ifo rm ( ) , C l o s u r e ( ) , and A dvan ce( ) used in constructing the S L R (l)
                    p arsin g tables.
    Section 6.2    A Syntax-Directed Technique                                         147


    property called uniformity defined as follows: a set of rules is uniform if and only if
    any left operand of a binary operator is a valid left operand of that operator in any
    Polish-prefix string containing the operator, and similarly for right operands and
    operands of unary operators. To be suitable for Graham-Glanville code generation,
    the set of rules must be uniform. The procedure Uniform( ) uses two functions
    that are defined below, namely, Parent ( ) and Left_Child( ) and two functions
    that are defined from the relations discussed in the next two paragraphs, namely,
    Left.First (x ,u ) and Right .First (x,w), which return true if x Left First u and
    x Right First u, respectively, and false otherwise.
        The function

        Parent: Vocab x Prefix — > Vocab

    where Prefix is the set of prefixes of sentences generated by the rules, returns the
    parent of its first argument in the tree form of its second argument, and the function

        Left_Cbild : Vocab x Prefix — > boolean

    returns a Boolean value indicating whether its first argument is the leftmost child of
    its parent in the tree form of its second argument.
         The relations used in the algorithm and in defining the functions and relations
    used in it are as follows (where BinOp and UnOp are the sets of binary and unary
    operator symbols and the lowercase Greek letters other than € stand for strings of
    symbols, respectively):

Left c (BinOp U UnOp) x Vocab
    x Left y if and only if there is a rule r => axyfi, where r may be e.
Right c BinOp x Vocab
    x Right y if and only if there is a rule r => otxfiyy for some p / e, where r may be c.
First c Vocab x Vocab
     x First y if and only if there is a derivation x ^ ya, where a may be c.
Last c Vocab x Vocab
    x Last y if and only if there is a derivation x    ay, where a may be e.
EpsLast c Vocab
   EpsLast = {x | 3 a rule c => ay and y Last x).
RootOps c BinOp U UnOp
   RootOps = [x | 3 a rule c =» x a and x e BinOp U UnOp}.

        The function Follow : Vocab — > Vocab can be defined from the auxiliary
    function Follow 1 : Vocab — ► Vocab and sets EpsLast and RootOps as follows:

        Followl{u) = [v | 3 a rule r =» axyfi such that x Last u and y First v}
                        Follow\(u) U RootOps          if u e EpsLast
        Follow(u) =
                        Follow\(u)                    otherwise
148              Producing Code Generators A utom atically


                 r.2 <- r.l                          r .2 => r.l                       or    r.1,0,r.2

                 r .3 <- r . l + r .2                r.3 => + r.l r.2                  add r .1,r .2,r .3
                 r.3 <- r.l + k.2                    r.3 => + r.l k.2                  add r .1,k .2,r .3

                 r .2 <- [r.l]                       r.2 => t r.l                      Id    [r.l],r.2

                 [r2] <- r.l                         € => <- r.2 r.l                   st    r.l,[r.2]

                 (a)                                 (b)                               (C)

      FIG. 6.8   (a) l i r instructions, (b) Graham-Glanville machine-description rules, and (c)
                 corresponding s p a r c instruction templates.


                       As an example of a Graham-Glanville code generator, consider the very
                 simple machine-description rules in Figure 6.8. In the example, we write
                 items in their traditional notation, that is, we write Lx => a * y !3] in place of
                 < l t : x , r t :cry/?,pos: |a|>. First, the Left, Right, and so on relations, sets, and func­
                 tions are as given in Figure 6.9. Next, we trace several stages of
                 G en_T ables( ) for the given grammar. Initially we have StateN o = MaxStateNo = 0
                 and Ite m S et[0 ] = { [e                 r r] >. N ext we call S u c c e sso rs (0 ), which sets
                 v = ' e ' , computes Act ion (0 , '         ) = < S h if t ,0 > , and sets Next Item s to
                       C lo su re(A d van ce( { [e => • <r- r r ] » )
                 which evaluates to
                       N extltem s = { [e =*•   • r r] , [r    • r] , [r => • + r r] ,
                                       [r => • + r k] , [r => • T r ] }
                 Now MaxStateNo is increased to 1, Item Set [1] is set to the value just computed for
                 N extltem s, and Next (0 , ' <r- ') is set to 1.
                     Next we compute U n ifo rm (l). All items in Item Set [1] have the dot at the
                 beginning, so this is vacuously tru e . In the following steps, Uniform ( ) always
                 returns tru e .
                     Next, StateN o is set to 1 and we call S u c c e s s o r s (1 ). It first sets v = ' r ' ,
                 computes Act ion (1 , ' r ' ) = < S h ift ,0 ) , and sets N extltem s to
                       C lo su re(A d van ce( { [c            • r r ] , [r => • r ] } ) )
                 which evaluates to
                       N extltem s = { [e => <- r • r ] , [r => r • ] , [r => • r ] ,
                                       [r => • + r r] , [r => • + r k] , [r => • t r] >
                 N ow MaxStateNo is increased to 2, Item Set [2] is set to the value just computed for
                 N extltem s, and N e x t( l, ' r ' ) is set to 2.
                      Next, S u c c e sso r s (1) sets v = ' + ', computes Act ion ( 1 , ’ + ’ ) = < S h ift ,0>, and
                 sets N extltem s to
                       C lo su re (Advance ( { [r          • + r r] , [r => • + r k ] » )
           Section 6.2        A Syntax-Directed Technique                                            149

                 +' Left ' r '              *T ■ Left ' r '                      Left '

                 + ' Right ' r '            ' +' Right ' k 1                     Right

                 r ' First ' r '           ' r ' First ' +'            ' r ' First 1T '

                 r ' Last ' r '             ' r ' Last 'k'

                         EpsLast = { ' r ' , ' k ' }            RootOps = { ' < - ' }

                              Followl (' € ') * { ' r ',
                              Followl (' r ') = { ' r ' ,           ,'t',
                              Followl (' k ') = { ' r ' ,           . ' T■ ,
                              Followl (' + ' ) = { ' r ' ,          .'f.
                              Followl (' t ') = 0
                              Followl ( ' < - ' ) = 0

                              FollowC € ') =                     +
                              F o II o w ( ' t ' ) = { ' r ' . ' + ' . ' T *
                              Follow C k ' ) = { ' r ' . ' + ' . ' t ' , ' < - • >
                              Follow(' + ') = { ' r ' j ' + ' / t '
                              Follow (' t ') = 0
                              Follow ( ' < - ' ) = 0

FIG. 6.9   Relations, sets, and functions for our example machine-description gram m ar in
           Figure 6.8.



           which evaluates to

               N e x tlte m s = { [ r => + • r r ] , [r => + • r k] , [ r =*• • r ] ,
                                   [r => • + r r ] , [r => • + r k] , [r => • T r ] >

           N o w M axStateN o is increased to 3, Ite m S e t [3] is set to the value just com puted for
           N e x tlte m s, and Next ( 1 , ' + ' ) is set to 3.
                The code-generator generator continues producin g S h i f t actions until it reaches
           M axStateN o = 9, for which Ite m S e t [9] is { [e => + r k •] , [r           k • ] } , which
           results in a Reduce action, namely,

                < R e d u c e ,{[>        + r k •]>>

                The resulting A ction/N ext table is show n in Figure 6 .1 0 and a graphic presen­
           tation o f the parsing autom aton app ears in Figure 6 .1 1 . In both the table and the
           diagram , only non-error transitions are show n. The entries in the table that contain
           a num ber correspond to shift actions, e.g., in state 3 with look ah ead ' r ', we shift
           and go to state 6. The entries for reduce actions are given as the set o f items to re­
           duce by, e.g., in state 5 for lookahead '        ', ' T ', ' + ' , or ' r ', reduce by the item
           set { [e =>     r r • ] } . In the diagram , a shift transition is represented by an arrow
           from one state to another labeled with the corresponding look ah ead sym bol. Thus,
150          Producing Code G enerators Autom atically



             State                               Lookahead Symbol
             Number           <-             t         +       r          k   $
             0                1                                               Accept
              1                              4         3       2
             2                               4         3       5
             3                               4         3       6
             4                               4         3       7
             5                  {[e =*> «- r r •]}
             6                               4         3          8       9
             7                      {[r =* t r •]>
              8                   {[r=» + r r •]>
             9                    {[r =*• + r k •]}

  FIG. 6.10 Action/Next table for the machine-description grammar given in Figure 6.8.


             for example, the arrow from state 3 to state 6 labeled with an ' r ' corresponds to
             the transition just described for the tabular form.
                  Next, we trace the action of the code generator with the above Action/Next table
             on the intermediate-code string

                  <-+rl2+Tr33$

             The process begins by setting s t a t e to 0, pushing 0 onto the stack, and fetching the
             symbol ' < - ' as the value of lookahead. The action for 1< - ' in state 0 is to shift, so
             the symbol is pushed onto the stack, the next state is fetched from the Action/Next
             table and pushed onto the stack, the lookahead symbol is discarded from the input
             string, and the lookahead symbol is set to the next symbol, namely, ' + '. The stack
             now has the contents

                     1                  0
             The action for ' + ' in state 1 is to shift and the next state is 3. The resulting stack is

                     3   '+ '           1                  0

             The action for lookahead r l in state 3 is to shift and enter state 6, so the stack
             becomes

                     6   rl         3       '+ '       1                  0

             Two more shift actions put the parser in state 9, with the lookahead set to ' +' and
             the stack

                     9   2      6       rl         3       ■+ '       1           0
            Section 6.2         A Syntax-Directed Technique                                         151




                                                                      Reduce
                                                                      {[€    <- r r •]>




FIG. 6.11   The code-generation automaton produced for the machine-description grammar in
            Figure 6.8.


            The appropriate action in state 9 is to reduce by the set o f items { [ r = » + r k * ] } ,
            so E m it _ I n s tr s ( ) is called. It allocates a register for the result o f the addition
            operation, namely, r2 , and outputs the instruction

                add         rl,2,r2

            The value o f l e f t is set to r2 and r i g h t is set to 3, so six items are popped off
            the stack and discarded, and r2 and the next state (2) are pushed onto the stack,
            resulting in

                  2    r2      1      *+'   0

            We leave it to the reader to continue the process and to verify that the following
            sequence of instructions is produced, assum ing registers r4 and r5 are allocated as
            shown:

                 add        rl,2,r2
                 Id          [ r 3 ] ,r 4
                 add        r 4 , 3 , r5
                 st         r 2 ,[ r 5 ]
152              P ro d u cin g C od e G e n e ra to rs A u to m a tic ally


6 .2 .3          Elim inating Chain Loops
                 In a parsing gram m ar, it is relatively rare to find chain loop s, i.e., sets o f nonterm inals
                 such that each o f them can derive the others. On the other hand, such loops are
                 extrem ely com m on in m achine descriptions. A s an exam ple o f the effect o f chain
                 loop s, consider the sim ple gram m ar consisting o f the follow ing rules (the fact that
                 the language generated by this gram m ar is em pty is irrelevant— adding productions
                 that generate term inals does not affect the presence o f the chain loop):

                      r    T r
                      r    s
                      s => t
                      t => r
                      6 => <- s t

                     The p arsin g autom aton for this gram m ar is shown in Figure 6 .1 2 . N ow , if we
                 take as input the interm ediate-code string <- r l t r 2 , then, after processing     r l,
                 the autom aton is in state 1, the stack is

                        1              0
                 and the look ah ead sym bol is ' T '. From this state, the code generator em its a register-
                 to-register m ove and returns to the sam e state, stack , and lookahead— i.e., it’s stuck.
                     Elim inating loop s can be done as a preprocessing step applied to the machine-
                 description gram m ar or during construction o f the A ction/N ext table. The code
                 in Figure 6 .1 3 provides a w ay to do this as a gram m ar preprocessor. The proce­
                 dure E lim _ C h ain _ L o ops ( ) finds productions < l t : /, r t : r> in MGrammar that have a




                        { [ r = * t r •]>            { [ r = * s •] >         { [ * =»   s t •]>

   F IG . 6.12   Parsing autom aton for the example gram mar that has a chain loop.
           Section 6.2     A Syntax-Directed Technique                                              153


           procedure Elim_Chain_Loops( )
           begin
               rl, r2: Rule
               C, MG: set of Rule
               R: set of Nonterminal
               MG := MGrammar
               for each rl e MG do
                   if rl.lt * € & Irl.rtl = 1 then
                       if Close(r1,C,R) then
                            for each r2 e C do
                                MGrammar := (MGrammar - {r2})
                                    u Replace(R,r2,rl.It)
                            od
                       fi
                   fi
                   MG -= {rl}
               od
           end    |I Elim_Chain_Loops

           procedure Close(rule,C,R) returns boolean
               rule: in Rule
               C: out set of Rule
               R: out set of Nonterminal
           begin
               rl: Rule
               II determine set of grammar rules making up a chain loop
               R := Reach(rule.rt)
               if rule.lt e R then
                   Prune(rule.It,R)
               fi
               C := 0
               for each rl e MGrammar do
                   if rl.lt e R & Irl.rtl = 1 & rl.rt e R then
                       C u= {rl}
                   fi
               od
               return C * 0
           end    |I Close

FIG. 6.13 The procedure Elim_Chain_Loops( ) to eliminate chain loops of nonterminals and the
          procedure C lose ( ) used by this procedure.


           single nonterminal on both the left-hand and right-hand sides. For each of them, it
           uses C lo se ( < l t : / , r t :r>, C ,R ) to determine whether the set of nonterminals deriv­
           able from r is a loop; if so, C lo se ( ) returns in R the set of nonterminals in the
           loop and in C the set of productions making it up. C lo se ( ) uses the procedures
           Reach ( ) and Prune ( ) defined in Figure 6.14 to determine the set of nonterminals
           reachable from its argument and to prune nonterminals from which the initial non­
           terminal is not reachable, respectively. Elim _Chain_Loops( ) then removes all but
           one of the nonterminals in the loop from the grammar, removes the rules making up
154           P ro d u c in g C o d e G e n e ra to r s A u to m a tic a lly

              procedure Reach(r) returns set of Nonterminal
                  r: in Nonterminal
              begin
                  rl: Rule
                  R := {r>, oldR: set of Nonterminal
                  I| determine the set of nonterminals reachable from r
                  I| without generating any terminal symbols
                  repeat
                      oldR := R
                      for each rl e MGrammar do
                         if rl.lt e R & Irl.rtl = 1 & rl.rtll e Nonterminal & rl.rtll ^ R then
                               R u= {rl.rt}
                          fi
                      od
                  until R = oldR
                  return R
              end    II Reach

             procedure Prune(1,R)
                 1: in Nonterminal
                 R: inout set of Nonterminal
             begin
                 r: Nonterminal
                 I| prune from R the set of nonterminals from which
                 I| the initial nonterminal is not reachable
                 for each r e R do
                     if 1 ^ Reach(r) then
                         R -= {r}
                     fi
                 od
             end    II Prune

  FIG. 6.14 The procedures Reach ( ) and Prune ( ) used by Close ( ).




             the loop, and modifies the remaining rules to use the remaining nonterminal in place
             of the others. The function R e p la c e (R ,r , x ) replaces all occurrences of symbols in
             R in the rule r by the symbol x , and returns a set containing only the resulting rule,
             except that if the resulting rule has identical left and right sides, it returns 0 instead.
                  There are situations in which chain loops might seem to be desirable, such as
             for moving values between the integer and floating-point registers in either direction.
             Such situations can easily be accommodated by explicit unary operators.



6.2.4        Eliminating Syntactic Blocks
             There are usually also situations in which the greedy strategy of always preferring to
             shift rather than to reduce can result in the code generator’s blocking, i.e., entering
            Section 6.2   A Syntax-Directed Technique                                                155

            € => <- a r
            s ==>r
            r => T a
            r => + r s
            r => * r s
            r => c
            a =>r
            a => + r r
            a => + r * 2 r
            a => + r * 4 r
            a => + r * 8 r

FIG. 6.15 Fragment of a machine-description grammar for Hewlett-Packard’s pa-risc addressing
          modes.



                                                                      T                  t

                                                                      +                  +

                                                                  r       *          r       *


                                                 r      s             r       r          c       r
FIG. 6.16 Derivation sequence for the tree form of t + r * c



           the E rro r state unnecessarily. For example, consider the machine-description frag­
           ment in Figure 6.15, which focuses on an addressing mode of Hewlett-Packard’s pa -
           risc ,and in which c represents an arbitrary integer constant. The addressing mode
           uses a base register plus an index register whose value may be left shifted by 0, 1, 2,
           or 3 bit positions (represented by the last four lines in the figure). Blocking occurs
           for this grammar fragment in the states containing the items [s              T + r * • n r]
           (where n = 2, 4, and 8) for any input symbol other than 2, 4, or 8. However, an ad­
           dress of the form + r * c r , for an arbitrary c, or + r * r r is legal— it just requires a
           series of instructions to compute it, rather than one instruction. In particular, in tree
           form, we have the derivation shown in Figure 6.16 for the first case, corresponding
           to performing a multiply, followed by an add, followed by a fetch. To achieve this
           in the code generator, we need to add transitions out of the states containing the
           items [s => T + r * • n r] that shift on an arbitrary constant or a register, rather
           than just on 2, 4, or 8. In accord with the derivation above, we add a transition on
           r to a new state and another shift transition from there under s to another new state
           that reduces by [ s = > T + r * r s •] and generates the corresponding sequence of
           instructions.
                F ix .S y n t .B lo c k s ( ) and auxiliary routines to repair syntactic blocking are
           given in Figure 6.17. F ix .S y n t .B lo c k s ( ) acts by generalizing the symbol that
           causes the blocking by following the inverses of chain productions as long as it can.
156           P ro d u c in g C o d e G e n e ra to r s A u to m a tic a lly


              procedure Fix.Synt.Blocks( ) returns boolean
              begin
                 i , j : integer
                 x , y : Nonterminal
                 item, iteml: Item
                 Nextltems, I: set of Item
                 i := 1
                 while i ^ MaxStateNo do
                 I := ItemSet [i]
                     for each item e I do
                         I| if there is a derivation that blocks for some inputs and
                         II not for others similar to it, attempt to generalize it by
                         II adding states and transitions to cover all similar inputs
                         if 3x e Nonterminal
                            (Derives([x],1, [item.rtl(item.pos+1)])
                            k Action(i,item.rtl(item.pos+1)) = <Error,0>
                            k Derives([item.lt],0,Subst(item.rt,item.pos+l,x))
                            k Vy € Nonterminal (!Derives( [y],1,[x]))
                               V !Derives([item.It],0,
                               Subst(item.rt,item.pos+1,[y]))) then
                            item := Generalize(<lt:item.lt,
                               rt:Subst(item.rt,item.pos+1,x),pos:item.pos>,
                               item.pos+1,1item.rtI)
                            if item = nil then
                               return false
                            fi
                            ItemSet[i] u= {item}
                            Action(i,x) := {Shift,0>
                            Nextltems := Closure(Advance({iteml e ItemSet[i]
                               where iteml.lt = item.lt k iteml.rt = Subst(item.rt,pos+1,x)
                               k iteml.pos = item.pos}))
                            if 3j e integer (ItemSet[j] = Nextltems) then
                               Next(i,x) := j
                            I| add new states and transitions where needed
                            else
                               StateNo := i
                               MaxStateNo += 1
                               ItemSet[MaxStateNo] := Nextltems
                               Next(StateNo,x) := MaxStateNo

  FIG. 6.17 Routines to repair syntactic blocking by generalizing one or more nonterminals.


              This algorithm may result in an item that needs further repair, as in this particular
              case, for which the final symbol also needs to be generalized to prevent blocking.
              Note that it is essential to the correct operation of D erives ( ) that wfe have already
              eliminated chain loops—otherwise it could recurse forever for some inputs.
                  As an example of the action of F ix .S y n t .B lo c k s ( ), suppose that the item
              [s => T + r * • 2 r] discussed above is in Item Set [26] and that MaxStateNo is 33.
              Code generation blocks in state 26 for any lookahead other than 2, so we apply the
            Section 6.2           A Syntax-Directed Technique                                      1 57

                                    while StateNo <= MaxStateNo do
                                         Successors(StateNo)
                                         if !Uniform(StateNo) then
                                            return false
                                         fi
                                    od
                               fi
                            else
                                 return false
                            fi
                            I       -= {item}
                       od
                       i += 1
                od
                return true
            end     I I Fix_Synt.Blocks

            procedure Generalize(item,lo,hi) returns Item
               item: in Item
               lo, hi: in integer
            begin
               i : integer
               1, x, y: Nonterminal
                  I I attempt to find a generalization of the blocking item
                  for i := lo to hi do
                     if 3x e Nonterminal (Derives([x],1,[item.rtli])
                           & Derives( [item.It],0,Subst(item.r t ,i ,x))
                        & Vy e Nonterminal (!Derives([y],1,[x])
                               V !Derives([item.lt],0,Subst(item.rt,i,y)))) then
                            item.rtli := x
                       fi
                  od
                  return item
            end       || Generalize

                                                                                           (continued)
FIG. 6.17   (continued)


            routine to discover whether other nonblocking actions are possible. The routine sets
            x to r and determines that there is a derivation s 2^, T + r * r r. So it calls
                  G en eralize( [s              T + r * • r r] ,6 ,6 )
            which returns [s => T + r * • r s ] . That item becomes the value of item and is
            added to Item Set[26]. Now Act ion (26, r) is set to { S h i f t , 0> and Next Items
            becomes
                  {[s=^T + r * r              • s] , [s = > • r ] }
               MaxStateNo is increased to 34 , ItemSet [34] is set to the above set, and
            Next (2 6 ,r) is set to 34 . Finally, the routine uses S u c c e sso rs( ) and Uniform( ) to
158           Producing Code G enerators Autom atically


              procedure Derives(x,i,s) returns boolean
                 x, s: in VocabSeq
                  i: in integer
              begin
                 j: integer
                  if i = 0 & x = s then
                     return true
                 fi
                 for each rule e MGrammar do
                     for j := 1 to |x| do
                        if rule.lt = xlj then
                           return Derives(rule.rt,0,s)
                        fi
                     od
                 od
                 return false
              end     II Derives

              procedure Subst(s,i,x) returns VocabSeq
                  s: in VocabSeq
                  i: in integer
                 x : in Vocab
              begin
                 t := [] : VocabSeq
                 j: integer
                 for j := 1 to IsI do
                     if j - i then
                        t ®= [x]
                     else
                        t ©= [slj]
                     fi
                 od
                 return t
              end     II Subst

  FIG. 6.17   (continued)

              produce the additional states and transitions necessary to process the new item and
              to ensure uniformity of the new states.



6.2.5         Final Considerations
              One issue that was a problem for early Graham-Glanville code generators is that the
              Action/Next tables for machines with many instruction types and addressing modes
              were huge (for the VAX, about 8,000,000 rules resulted). Henry [Henr84] devised
              methods for significantly compressing the tables and, in any case, the problem is
              nowhere near as severe for the typical Rise machine because of the small number of
              addressing modes provided by most o f them.
Section 6.3     Introduction to Semantics-Directed Parsing                          159


Introduction to Semantics-Directed Parsing
In this section, we give an overview of a second, more powerful, and more complex
approach to code generation from Polish-prefix intermediate code, namely, the at­
tribute- or affix-grammar method developed by Ganapathi and Fischer, which adds
semantics to the code-generation rules through the use of attributes. We sketch the
idea here and leave it to the reader to consult the literature for the details.
     We assume familiarity with the basics of attribute grammars. We denote inher­
ited attributes by preceding them with a down arrow “ i ” and synthesized attributes
with an up arrow “ t ” . Attribute values are written after the arrows. In addition
to passing values up and down in the code-generation process, attributes are used
to control code generation and to compute new attribute values and produce side
effects. Control is achieved through attributes written in capitalized italics (e.g.,
IsShort in the example below) that represent predicates. A rule is applicable in a
given situation if and only if it syntactically matches the subject string and all its
predicates are satisfied. Actions, written in uppercase typewriter font (e.g., EMIT3
in the example), compute new attribute values and produce side effects. The most
important side effect in an affix-grammar code generator is, of course, emitting code.
     Thus, for example, the Graham-Glanville rules for addition of the contents of a
register and a constant from Figure 6.1

    r.3       + r.l k .2             add r . 1 , k . 2 , r . 3
    r.3       + k .2 r.l             add r . 1 , k . 2 , r . 3

can be turned into affix-grammar rules that check that the constant is within the
allowed range and that subsume code emission and register allocation in the rules,
as follows:

    r t r2    + r l rl k i k l IsShort(kl) ALL0C(r2) EMIT3("add" ,r l ,k l ,r2)
    r t r2 => + k i k\ r i rl IsShort(kl) ALL0CO2) EMIT3(nadd" ,r l , k l ,r2)

The first of these should be read as follows: Given a Polish-prefix string of the form
+ r k with the register number having the value rl and the constant k l, if the
constant satisfies the predicate IsShort(k 1), then allocate a register r2 to hold the
result, emit the three-operand add instruction obtained by substituting the values
associated with the registers and the constant, reduce the string to r, and pass the
value r2 upward as a synthesized attribute of the nonterminal r.
     In addition to generating code from a low-level intermediate language, affix
grammars can be used to do storage binding (i.e., to generate code from a medium-
level intermediate form), to integrate several kinds of peephole optimizations into
code generation, and to factor machine-description rule sets so as to significantly
reduce their size. Since affix grammars can do storage binding, we could start with
a somewhat higher-level intermediate code, such as a Polish-prefix translation of
m ir . In fact, since the predicates and functions may be coded arbitrarily, they can be
used to do virtually anything a compiler back end can do— for example, one could
accumulate all the code to be emitted as the value of some attribute until the entire
input string has been reduced and then do essentially any transformation on it for
160   Producing Code Generators Automatically


      which sufficient information is available (and one could accumulate that information
      during the code-generation process, also).
          Ganapathi and Fischer report having built three affix-grammar-based code­
      generator generators (one from the unix parser generator YACC, the second from
      ECP, and a third ab initio) and have used them to produce code generators in
      compilers for Fortran, Pascal, basic , and Ada for nearly a dozen architectures.


6.4   Tree Pattern Matching and Dynamic
      Programming
      In this section, we give an introduction to a third approach to automatically generat­
      ing code generators that was developed by Aho, Ganapathi, and Tjiang [AhoG89].
      Their approach uses tree pattern matching and dynamic programming. The resulting
      system is known as twig.
           Dynamic programming is an approach to decision making in a computational
      process that depends on an optimality principle that applies to the domain under
      consideration. The optimality principle asserts that if all subproblems have been
      solved optimally, then the overall problem can be solved optimally by a particular
      method of combining the solutions to the subproblems. Using dynamic program­
      ming contrasts sharply with the greedy approach taken by Graham-Glanville code
      generators—rather than trying only one way to match a tree, we may try many, but
      only those that are optimal for the parts already matched, since only they can be
      combined to produce code sequences that are optimal overall, given an applicable
      optimality principle.
           When twig matches a subtree with a pattern, it generally replaces it by another
      tree. The sequence of subtrees rewritten in a matching process that succeeds in
      reducing a tree to a single node is called a cover of the tree. A minimal-cost cover
      is a cover such that the sum of the costs (see below for details) for the matching
      operations that produced the cover is as small as it can be. Code emission and
      register allocation are performed as side effects of the matching process.
           The input for twig consists of tree-rewriting rules of the form
          label:   pattern [{cost}] [= {action}]
      where label is an identifier that corresponds to the nonterminal on the left-hand side
      of a grammar rule; pattern is a parenthesized prefix representation of a tree pattern;
      cost is C code to be executed by the code generator when a subtree matches the
      pattern, and that both returns a cost for use by the dynamic programming algorithm
      and determines whether the pattern meets the semantic criteria for matching the
      subtree; and action is C code to be executed if the pattern match succeeds and the
      dynamic programming algorithm determines that the pattern is part of the minimal-
      cost cover of the overall tree. The action part may include replacing the matched
      subtree with another, emitting code, or other actions.
           The cost and action parts are both optional, as indicated by the brackets around
      them. If the cost is omitted, a default cost specified elsewhere is returned and the
      pattern is assumed to match. If the action is omitted, the default is to do nothing.
           Section 6.4         Tree Pattern Matching and Dynamic Programming                              161

           Rule Number              Rewriting Rule                        Cost            Instruction

                1        reg./=> con.c                              IsShort(c) ;1    or c,rO,r/


                2         reg./=>                                            1       Id     [r7,rA] ,r/
                                       reg.   j        reg. A:


                3         reg./                                     IsShort(c) ; 1   Id     [r7,c] ,r/


                                                  <-
                4                                                                    st r/, [r7,rA]
                                    reg./ reg.7 reg.A


                5          e                                        IsShortic) ;1    st r/, [r7,c]
                                    reg./ reg .7 con .c
                                                  +
                6         reg.As                                            1        add   ritrjtrk
                                       reg./           reg .7

FIG. 6.18 A simple tree-rewriting system.


                 As an example of the pattern-matching process, consider the tree-rewriting sys­
           tem in Figure 6.18, which includes the tree forms of some of the rules in Figure 6.1.
           The predicate IsShort{ ) determines whether its argument fits into the 13-bit con­
           stant field in sparc instructions. The corresponding twig specification is shown in
           Figure 6.19. The p ro lo gu e implements the function IsShort( ). The l a b e l declara­
           tion lists all the identifiers that can appear as labels, and the node declaration lists
           all the identifiers that can occur in the patterns, in addition to those listed as labels.1
           The string $$ is a pointer to the root of the tree matched by the pattern, and a string
           of the form $/$ points to the zth child of the root. ABORT causes pattern matching to
           be aborted, in effect by returning an infinite cost. NODEPTR is the type of nodes, and
           g e tr e g ( ) is the register allocator. The various e m i t . . . . ( ) routines emit particular
           types of instructions.
                 Now, suppose we are generating code for the parenthesized prefix expression

               s t ( ad d ( I d ( r 8 , 8 ) , a d d (r 2 , I d ( r 8 , 4 ) ) ) )

           which is designed to resemble the second tree in Figure 6.3, but using only the
           operations defined in Figure 6.19. The pattern matcher would descend through the
           tree structure of the expression until it finds that pattern 1 matches the subexpression
           “ 8 ” and pattern 3 matches ul d ( r 8 , 8 ) ” . Using the first of these matches would


           1. Alphabetic identifiers are used instead of symbols such as “ T” and “ + ” because tw ig is not
           designed to handle the latter.
162           Producing Code G enerators Autom atically


              prologue { int IsShort(NODEPTR p);
                  { return value(p) >= -4096 && value(p) <= 4095; }           }
              node con Id st add;
              label reg no.value;

              reg : con
                    { if (IsShort($$)) cost = 1;
                      else ABORT; >
                    = { NODEPTR regnode * getreg( );
                        emit_3("or",$$,"rO",regnode);
                        return regnode; >

              reg : ld(reg,reg,reg)
                    { cost = 1; }
                    - { NODEPTR regnode = getregC );
                        emit_ld($2$,$3$,regnode);
                        return regnode; }

              reg : ld(reg,reg,con)
                    { cost = 1; }
                    = { NODEPTR regnode = getregC );
                        emit_ld($2$,$3$,regnode);
                        return regnode; }

              no_value : st(reg,reg,reg)
                    { cost = 1; }
                    = { emit.st($1$,$2$,$3$);
                        return NULL; >

              no.value : st(reg,con,reg)
                    { cost = 1; >
                    = { emit_st($1$,$2$,$3$);
                        return NULL; }

              reg : add(reg,reg,reg)
                    { cost = 1; >
                    = { NODEPTR regnode = getregC );
                        emit_3("add",$1$,$2$,regnode);
                        return regnode; >

  FIG. 6.19 Specification in twig corresponding to the tree-rewriting system in Figure 6.18.


              result in a subtree that matches pattern 2, but its cost would be 2, rather than the 1
              resulting from using pattern 3 alone, so pattern 3 would be used. The subexpression
              “ l d ( r 8 ,4 ) ” would be matched similarly. However, neither of the implied reductions
              would be done immediately, since there might be alternative matches that would
              have lower cost; instead, an indication of each match would be stored in the node
              that is the root of the matched subexpression. Once the matching process has been
              completed, the reductions and actions are performed.
            Section 6.4    Tree Pattern Matching and Dynamic Programming                        163

            Path String         Rules
            c                   1
            t 1r                2,3
            t 2 r               2
            t 2 c               3
            <- 1 r              4,5
            +- 2 r              4,5
            <- 3 r              4
            <— 3 c              5
            + 1 r               6
            + 2 r               6

FIG. 6.20 Tree-matching path strings for the rules in Figure 6.18.


                 The method twig uses to do code generation is a combination of top-down tree
            pattern matching and dynamic programming, as indicated above. The basic idea
            is that a tree can be characterized by the set of labeled paths from its root to its
            leaves, where the labeling numbers the descendants of each node consecutively. A
            path string alternates node identifiers with integer labels. For example, the third tree
            in Figure 6.3 can be represented uniquely by the path strings

                <- 1 + 1 r8
                <-1 + 2 4
                <- 2 - 1 rl
                +   2 - 21
            and similar sets of strings can be constructed for the tree patterns. The path strings
            for a set of tree patterns can, in turn, be used to construct a pattern-matching
            automaton that is a generalization of a finite automaton. The automaton matches
            the various tree patterns in parallel and each accepting state indicates which paths
            through which tree patterns it corresponds to. A subtree matches a tree pattern if
            and only if there is a traversal of the automaton that results in an accepting state for
            each path string corresponding to the tree pattern.
                 As an example of such an automaton, we construct one for the rules in Fig­
            ure 6.18. The path strings and the rules they correspond to are listed in Figure 6.20,
            and the resulting automaton is shown in Figure 6.21. The initial state is 0, the
            states with double circles are accepting states, and each non-accepting state has an
            additional unshown transition, namely, for “ other,” go to the error state (labeled
            “ error” ). The labels near the accepting states give the numbers of the rules for which
            some path string produces that state. Thus, for example, the pattern in rule 5 is
            matched if and only if running the automaton in parallel results in halting in states
            9, 11, and 14. Details of the construction of the automaton and how it is turned into
            code can be found in the literature.
                 The dynamic programming algorithm assumes that it is given a uniform register
            machine with n interchangeable registers r i and instructions of the form r i <- E,
            where E is an expression consisting of operators, registers, and memory locations.
            The cost associated with a sequence of instructions is the sum of the costs of the
164          Producing Code Generators Automatically

                   2,3




                    6           6
  FIG* 6.21 Tree-matching automaton for the rules in Figure 6.18.



             individual instructions. The algorithm partitions the code-generation problem for
             an expression E into subproblems, one for each of E ’s subexpressions, and solves
             the subproblems recursively. The key to making dynamic programming applicable is
             to evaluate each expression contiguously, i.e., first those of its subtrees that need to
             have their values stored in memory locations are evaluated, and then the expression
             is evaluated either in the order left subtree, right subtree, root; or right subtree, left
             subtree, root. Thus, there is no oscillation between the subtrees of an operator once
             the parts of the expression that have to be stored to memory have been evaluated.
             Then for any sequence of instructions for the uniform register machine that evaluates
             a given expression, there is a sequence that evaluates the same expression at no
             greater cost, with a minimal number of registers, and is contiguous.
                  Note that most real machines do not have uniform registers. In particular, they
             have operations that use even-odd register pairs, and one can give examples of
             expressions whose optimal evaluation sequences require arbitrary numbers of oscil­
             lations between their subexpressions. However, such examples are very unusual in
Section 6.5    Wrap-Up                                                             165


that the size of the expressions grows at least linearly with the number of oscillations
required, and expressions in practice are generally not very big. Thus, contiguity is
only mildly violated, and the algorithm produces near-optimal instruction sequences
almost all the time in practice.
     Aho and Johnson’s algorithm [AhoJ76] (1) computes bottom-up, for each node
N of an expression tree, entries in a table of costs c[N, /] for computing the tree
rooted at N , using at most i registers; (2) uses the cost table to determine which
subtrees must have their values stored to memory; and (3) recursively determines a
sequence of instructions that does an optimal evaluation of the tree.
    Experience with twig shows that it is relatively easy to write and modify twig
specifications, and that it produces code generators that compare favorably in both
code quality and performance with code generators designed to be easily retargeted,
such as the one in the pcc2 portable C compiler.
     Bottom-up tree matching can also be used to automatically produce, from ma­
chine descriptions, code generators that generate optimal code. One such approach
was developed by Pelegri-Llopart and is based on bottom-up rewriting systems,
or BURS.




Wrap-Up
In this chapter, we have briefly discussed the issues in generating machine code from
intermediate code, and then we have explored automatic methods for generating
code generators from machine descriptions.
     The basic issues include the architecture of the target machine, software con­
ventions that must be observed, the structure and characteristics of the intermediate
language, the implementations of intermediate-language operations that don’t corre­
spond directly to target-machine instructions, whether to target assembly language
or relocatable machine code, and the approach to translating intermediate code to
the chosen target-code form.
     Whether we are writing a compiler for a single language and a single target
architecture, or multiple source languages, multiple target architectures, or both
determine the importance of the choices made for most of these issues. In particular,
the more target architectures involved, the more important it is to use automated
methods.
     While hand-crafted code generators are effective and fast, they have the (ob­
vious) disadvantage of being implemented by hand and so are usually much more
difficult to modify or port than a code generator that is automatically generated
from a machine description.
     Several approaches have been developed that produce a code generator from a
machine description. We have described three of them in varying levels of detail. All
begin with a low-level intermediate code that has addressing computations exposed,
and in all cases the code generator does pattern matching on trees, either explicitly
in one case or implicitly in the other two cases, namely, on Polish-prefix intermediate
code that represents a preorder traversal of a sequence of trees.
     Producing Code Generators Automatically


     Further Reading
     The first significantly successful project to generate code generators automatically is
     reported in [Catt79].
          The Graham-Glanville approach to code generation is first described in
     [GlaG78] and developed further in [AigG84] and [Henr84]. Other implementations
     of Graham-Glanville code-generator generators are described in [GraH82], [Bird82],
     [LanJ82], and [ChrH84].
          The attribute-grammar approach to code generation was developed by Gana-
     pathi and Fischer and is described in [GanF82], [GanF84], and [GanF85], among
     other papers. The ECP error-correcting parser, which served as the basis of one of
     Ganapathi and Fischer’s implementations, is described in [MauF81].
          An excellent introduction to tree automata and their uses can be found in
     [Enge75]. The tree-pattern matching approach to code generation developed by
     Aho, Ganapathi, and Tjiang is described in [AhoG89]. The tree pattern matcher
     is a generalization of a linear-time string-matching algorithm due to Aho and Cora-
     sick [AhoC75], incorporating some ideas from Hoffman and O’Donnell [Hof082]
     that extend it to trees. The dynamic programming algorithm is based on one de­
     veloped by Aho and Johnson [AhoJ76]. The pcc2 portable C compiler that Aho,
     Ganapathi, and Tjiang compared twig to is described in [John78]. Pelegri-Llopart’s
     approach to generating locally optimal code by bottom-up tree matching is described
     in [Pele88] and [PelG88]. A tree-automata-based approach to code generation that
     begins with a high-level intermediate code is described in [AhaL93].
          Henry and Damron ([HenD89a] and [HenD89b]) provide an excellent overview
     of about a dozen approaches to automatically generating code generators from
     machine descriptions, giving detailed discussions and evaluations of eight of them
     and a comparison of their performance, both in terms of the speed of the code
     generators they produce and the quality of the resulting code.


     Exercises
6.1 Write an ican version of E m it_ In strs( ) (see Section 6.2.1) sufficient for the gram­
    mar in Figure 6.8, including distinguishing short constants.
6.2 (a) Construct the Graham-Glanville parsing tables for the machine-description rules
    and machine instructions below, where f r .n denotes a floating-point register.
         f r .2 => f r . l                 fmov      fr .l,fr .2
         f r . 2 => mov f r . 2 f r . l    fmov      fr .l,fr .2

         r .3 => + r . l r .2              add      r . 1 , r . 2 , r .3
         r .3 => - r . l r .2              sub      r . 1 , r . 2 , r .3

         f r .3 => +f f r . l f r . 2      fadd      f r . 1 , f r . 2 , f r .3
         f r .3 => - f f r . l f r . 2     fsu b     f r . 1 , f r . 2 , f r .3
         f r .3 => * f f r . l f r . 2     fm uls    f r .l,fr .2 ,fr .3
           Section 6.7   Exercises                                                           167

               fr.3 => /f fr.l fr.2              fdivs fr.1,fr.2,fr.3
               fr.2 => sqrt fr.l                 fsqrts fr.l,fr.2

               fr.2 => cvti fr.l fr.2            fstoi    fr.l,fr.2
               fr.2 => cvtf fr.l fr.2            f itos   fr.l,fr.2

               fr.3 => T + r.l r .2              ldf      [r.1,r.2],fr.3
               fr.3 => T + r.l k.2               ldf      [r.1,k.2],fr.3
               fr.2 => T r.l                     ldf      [r.l],fr.2

               6 => <- + r .2 r .3 fr.l          stf      fr.l, [r.2,r .3]
               6 => <- + r .2 k.l fr.l           stf      fr.1,[r.2,k.3]

           (b) Check your parsing automaton by generating code for the Polish-prefix sequence
               <- + rl 4 cvti -f fr2
               mov fr2 *f fr3 t + rl 8
               <r- + rl 12 sqrt T + r7 0

      63   Construct the relations (Left, Right, etc.) and functions (Parent( ), Follow( ), etc.)
           for the grammar in the preceding exercise.
      6.4 Give a more complex example of chain loops than that found at the beginning of
          Section 6.2.3, and use the algorithm in Figure 6.13 to eliminate it.
      6.5 Write a chain-loop eliminator that can be used during or after the Graham-Glanville
          parsing tables have been constructed.
      6.6 Give an example of the use of dynamic programming in computer science other than
          the one in Section 6.4.
RSCH 6.7 Read Pelegri-Llopart and Graham ’s article [PelG88] and write a BURS-based code­
         generator generator in ican .
                                                                             CHAPTER 7



                  Control-Flow Analysis




O
            ptimization requires that we have compiler components that can construct
            a global “ understanding” of how programs use the available resources.1
            The compiler must characterize the control flow of programs and the
            manipulations they perform on their data, so that any unused generality that woul
ordinarily result from unoptimized compilation can be stripped away; thus, less
efficient but more general mechanisms are replaced by more efficient, specialized
ones.
     When a program is read by a compiler, it is initially seen as simply a sequence
of characters. The lexical analyzer turns the sequence of characters into tokens, and
the parser discovers a further level of syntactic structure. The result produced by
the compiler front end may be a syntax tree or some lower-level form of intermedi­
ate code. However, the result, whatever its form, still provides relatively few hints
about what the program does or how it does it. It remains for control-flow analysis
to discover the hierarchical flow of control within each procedure and for data-flow
analysis to determine global (i.e., procedure-wide) information about the manipula­
tion of data.
     Before we consider the formal techniques used in control-flow and data-flow
analysis, we present a simple example. We begin with the C routine in Figure 7.1,
which computes, for a given m > 0, the mth Fibonacci number. Given an input value
m, it checks whether it is less than or equal to 1 and returns the argument value if
so; otherwise, it iterates until it has computed the mth member of the sequence and
returns it. In Figure 7.2, we give a translation of the C routine into m i r .
     Our first task in analyzing this program is to discover its control structure. One
might protest at this point that the control structure is obvious in the source code—


1. We put quotation marks around “ understanding” because we feel it is important to guard against
anthropomorphizing the optimization process, or, for that matter, computing in general.

                                                                                             169
170                Control-Flow Analysis


                   unsigned int fib(m)
                      unsigned int m;
                   { unsigned int fO = 0, fl = 1, f2, i;
                      if (m <= 1) {
                         return m;
                        >
                        else {
                           for (i = 2; i <= m; i++) {
                              f2 = fO + fl;
                              fO = fl;
                              fl = f2;
                             }
                             return f2;
                        >
                   }
      F IG . 7.1   A C routine that com putes Fibonacci numbers.




                    1           receive m (val)
                    2           fO < - 0
                    3           fl <- 1
                    4           if m <= 1 goto L3
                    5           i <- 2
                    6       LI: if i <= m goto L2
                    7           return f2
                    8       L2: f2 <- fO + fl
                    9           fO <- fl
                   10           fl <- f2
                   11           i <- i + 1
                   12           goto LI
                   13       L3: return m

      F IG . 7.2   mir intermediate code for the C routine in Figure 7.1.



                   the routine’s body consists of an if- t h e n - e ls e with a loop in the e ls e part; but this
                   structure is no longer obvious in the intermediate code. Further, the loop might have
                   been constructed of i f s and gotos, so that the control structure might not have been
                   obvious in the source code. Thus, the formal methods of control-flow analysis are
                   definitely not useless. To make their application to the program clearer to the eye,
                   we first transform it into an alternate visual representation, namely, a flowchart, as
                   shown in Figure 7.3.
                        Next, we identify basic blocks, where a basic block is, informally, a straight-line
                   sequence of code that can be entered only at the beginning and exited only at the
                   end. Clearly, nodes 1 through 4 form a basic block, which we call Bl, and nodes 8
                   through 11 form another, which we call B6. Each of the other nodes is a basic block
Control-Flow Analysis                                                             171




unto itself; we make node 12 into B2, node 5 into B3, node 6 into B4, and node 7
into B5. Next we collapse the nodes that form a basic block into a node representing
the whole sequence of mir instructions, resulting in the so-called flowgraph of the
routine shown in Figure 7.4. For technical reasons that will become clear when we
discuss backward data-flow analysis problems, we add an en try block with the
first real basic block as its only successor, an e x it block at the end, and branches
following each actual exit from the routine (blocks B2 and B5) to the e x it block.
     Next, we identify the loops in the routine by using what are called dominators.
In essence, a node A in the flowgraph dominates a node B if every path from the
entry node to B includes A. It is easily shown that the dominance relation on the
nodes of a flowgraph is antisymmetric, reflexive, and transitive, with the result that
it can be displayed by a tree with the entry node as the root. For our flowgraph in
Figure 7.4, the dominance tree is shown in Figure 7.5.
     Now we can use the dominance tree to identify loops. A back edge in the
flowgraph is an edge whose head dominates its tail, for example, the edge from B6
to B4. A loop consists of all nodes dominated by its entry node (the head of the back
edge) from which the entry node can be reached (and the corresponding edges) and
172             Control-Flow Analysis




      FIG. 7.4 Flowgraph corresponding to Figure 7.3.




      FIGr. 7.5 Dominance tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.4.


                having exactly one back edge within it. Thus, B4 and B6 form a loop with B4 as its
                entry node, as expected, and no other set of nodes in the flowgraph does.
                    We shall continue with this example in Chapter 8 as our initial example of
                data-flow analysis. We now proceed to a more formal exposition of the concepts
                encountered in the example and several elaborations of and alternatives to them.



7.1             Approaches to Control-Flow Analysis
                There are two main approaches to control-flow analysis of single routines, both
                of which start by determining the basic blocks that make up the routine and then
     Section 7.1      Approaches to Control-Flow Analysis                                            173


     constructing its flowgraph. The first approach uses dominators to discover loops
     and simply notes the loops it finds for use in optimization. This approach is sufficient
     for use by optimizers that do data-flow analysis by iteration, as in our example in
     Section 8.1, or that concentrate their attention strictly on the loops in a routine.
          The second approach, called interval analysis, includes a series of methods
     that analyze the overall structure of the routine and that decompose it into nested
     regions called intervals. The nesting structure of the intervals forms a tree called a
     control tree, which is useful in structuring and speeding up data-flow analysis. The
     most sophisticated variety of interval analysis, called structural analysis, classifies
     essentially all the control-flow structures in a routine. It is sufficiently important
     that we devote a separate section to it. The data-flow analysis methods based on
     the use of intervals are generally called elimination methods, because of a broad
     similarity between them and Gaussian elimination methods for problems in linear
     algebra.
          Most current optimizing compilers use dominators and iterative data-flow ana­
     lysis. And, while this approach is the least time-intensive to implement and is suf­
     ficient to provide the information needed to perform most of the optimizations
     discussed below, it is inferior to the other approaches in three ways, as follows:
1.   The interval-based approaches are faster at performing the actual data-flow analyses,
     especially for structural analysis and programs that use only the simpler types of
     structures.
2.   The interval-based approaches (particularly structural analysis) make it easier to up­
     date already computed data-flow information in response to changes to a program
     (changes made either by an optimizer or by the compiler user), so that such infor­
     mation need not be recomputed from scratch.
3.   Structural analysis makes it particularly easy to perform the control-flow transfor­
     mations discussed in Chapter 18.
     Thus, we feel that it is essential to present all three approaches and to leave it to
     the compiler implementer to choose the combination of implementation effort and
     optimization speed and capabilities desired.
          Since all the approaches require identification of basic blocks and construction
     of the flowgraph of the routine, we discuss these topics next. Formally, a basic block
     is a maximal sequence of instructions that can be entered only at the first of them
     and exited only from the last of them. Thus, the first instruction in a basic block may
     be (1) the entry point of the routine, (2) a target of a branch, or (3) an instruction
     immediately following a branch or a return.2 Such instructions are called leaders. To
     determine the basic blocks that compose a routine, we first identify all the leaders,


     2. If we consider Rise machine instructions, rather than intermediate-code instructions, we may
     need to modify this definition slightly: if the architecture has delayed branches, the instruction in
     the delay slot of a branch may be in the basic block ended by the preceding branch and may a lso
     begin a new basic block itself, if it is the target of a branch. Branches with two delay slots, as in
     mips -x ,complicate this still further. Our intermediate codes do n o t include this complication.
174   Control-Flow Analysis


      and then, for each leader, include in its basic block all the instructions from the leader
      to the next leader or the end of the routine, in sequence.
            In almost all cases, the above approach is sufficient to determine the basic-block
      structure of a procedure. On the other hand, note that we have not indicated whether
      a call instruction should be considered a branch in determining the leaders in a
      routine. In most cases, it need not be considered a branch, resulting in longer and
      fewer basic blocks, which is desirable for optimization. However, if a procedure call
      has alternate returns as it may in Fortran, then it must be considered a basic-block
      boundary. Similarly, in some special cases in C, a call needs to be considered a basic-
      block boundary. The best-known example is C ’s s e t jmp( ) function, which provides
      a crude exception-handling mechanism. The problem with a setjm p( ) call is that,
      not only does it return to just after where it was called from, but a later use of the
      exception-handling mechanism, i.e., a call to longjmp( ), also passes control from
      wherever it is called to the return point of the dynamically enclosing setjm p( ) call.
      This requires the call to setjm p ( ) to be considered a basic-block boundary and,
      even worse, introduces phantom edges into the flowgraph: in general, any call from
      the routine that did the setjm p ( ) needs a control-flow edge inserted from its re­
      turn point to the return point of the setjm p( ), since potentially any of these calls
      could return to that point by invoking longjmp( ). In practice, this is usually han­
      dled by not attempting to optimize routines that include calls to setjm p( ), but
      putting in the phantom control-flow edges is a (usually very pessimistic) alterna­
      tive.
            In Pascal, a goto that exits a procedure and passes control to a labeled statement
      in a statically enclosing one results in similar extra edges in the flowgraph of the con­
      taining procedure. However, since such gotos can always be identified by processing
      nested procedures from the innermost ones outward, they do not cause as serious a
      problem as setjm p ( ) does in C.
            Some optimizations will make it desirable to consider calls as behaving like
      basic-block boundaries also. In particular, instruction scheduling (see Section 17.1)
      may need to consider calls to be basic-block boundaries to fill delay slots properly,
      but may also benefit from having longer blocks to work on. Thus, calls may be desir­
      able to be considered to be both block boundaries and not in the same optimization.
            Now, having identified the basic blocks, we characterize the control flow in a
      procedure by a rooted, directed graph (hereafter called simply a graph) with a set of
      nodes, one for each basic block plus two distinguished ones called entry and e x it,
      and a set of (control-flow) edges running from basic blocks to others in the same way
      that the control-flow edges of the original flowchart connected the final instructions
      in the basic blocks to the leaders of basic blocks; in addition, we introduce an edge
      from en try to the initial basic block(s)3 of the routine and an edge from each final
      basic block (i.e., a basic block with no successors) to e x it. The entry and e x it




      3. There is usually only one initial basic block per routine. However, some language constructs,
      such as Fortran 77’s multiple entry points, allow there to be more than one.
Section 7.1    Approaches to Control-Flow Analysis                                175


blocks are not essential and are added for technical reasons—they make many of our
algorithms simpler to describe. (See, for example, Section 13.1.2, where, in the data­
flow analysis performed for global common-subexpression elimination, we need to
initialize the data-flow information for the en try block differently from all other
blocks if we do not ensure that the en try block has no edges entering it; a similar
distinction occurs for the e x it block in the data-flow analysis for code hoisting in
Section 13.5.) The resulting directed graph is the flowgraph of the routine. A strongly
connected subgraph of a flowgraph is called a region.
      Throughout the remainder of the book, we assume that we are given a flowgraph
G = (N, E) with node set N and edge set E c N x N , where en try € N and
e x it € N. We generally write edges in the form a^>b, rather than (a , b).
      Further, we define the sets of successor and predecessor basic blocks of a basic
block in the obvious way, a branch node as one that has more than one successor,
and a join node as one that has more than one predecessor. We denote the set of
successors of a basic block b e N by Succ(b) and the set of predecessors by Pred(b).
Formally,

    Succ(b) = {n e N \ 3e e E such that e = b^>n]
    Pred(b) = [n e N \3e e E such that e = n^>b]

     An extended basic block is a maximal sequence of instructions beginning with
a leader that contains no join nodes other than its first node (which need not be
a join node itself if, e.g., it is the entry node). Since an extended basic block has
a single entry and possibly multiple exits, it can be thought of as a tree with its
entry basic block as the root. We refer to the basic blocks that make up an extended
basic block in this way in some contexts. As we shall see in succeeding chapters,
some local optimizations, such as instruction scheduling (Section 17.1), are more
effective when done on extended basic blocks than on basic blocks. In our example in
Figure 7.4, blocks Bl, B2, and B3 make up an extended basic block that is not a basic
block.
     An ican algorithm named Build_Ebb(r, Succ, Pred) that constructs the set of
indexes of the blocks in an extended basic block with block r as its root is given in
Figure 7.6. The algorithm Build_All_Ebbs(r, Succ, Pred) in Figure 7.7 constructs
the set of all extended basic blocks for a flowgraph with entry node r. It sets AllEbbs
to a set of pairs with each pair consisting of the index of its root block and the set
of indexes of blocks in an extended basic block. Together the two algorithms use
the global variable EbbRoots to record the root basic blocks of the extended basic
blocks.
     As an example of Build_Ebb( ) and Build_All_Ebbs( ), consider the flow-
graph in Figure 7.8. The extended basic blocks discovered by the algorithms are
{e n try }, {B1,B2,B3}, {B4,B6>, {B5,B7>, and { e x i t } , as indicated by the dashed
boxes in the figure.
     Similarly, a reverse extended basic block is a maximal sequence of instructions
ending with a branch node that contains no branch nodes other than its last node.
176              Control-Flow Analysis


                 EbbRoots: set of Node
                 AllEbbs: set of (Node x set of Node)

                 procedure Build_Ebb(r,Succ,Pred) returns set of Node
                     r: in Node
                     Succ, Pred: in Node — > set of Node
                 begin
                    Ebb := 0: set of Node
                    Add.Bbs(r,Ebb,Succ,Pred)
                    return Ebb
                 end      II Build_Ebb

                 procedure Add_Bbs(r,Ebb,Succ,Pred)
                     r: in Node
                     Ebb: inout set of Node
                     Succ, Pred: in Node — > set of Node
                 begin
                     x: Node
                     Ebb u= {r}
                     for each x e Succ(r) do
                          if |Pred(x)| = 1 & x £ Ebb then
                              Add.Bbs(x,Ebb,Succ,Pred)
                          elif x £ EbbRoots then
                              EbbRoots u= {x}
                          fi
                     od
                 end     II Add_Bbs

      FIG. 7.6 A pair of routines to construct the set of blocks in the extended basic block with a given
               root.


                 entry: Node

                 procedure Build_All_Ebbs(r,Succ,Pred)
                    r: in Node
                    Succ, Pred: in Node — > set of Node
                 begin
                    x: Node
                    s : Node x set of Node
                    EbbRoots := {r}
                    AllEbbs := 0

      FIG. 7.7 A routine to construct all the extended basic blocks in a given flowgraph.
            Section 7.2   Depth-First, Preorder, Postorder, and Breadth-First Searches      177

               while EbbRoots * 0 do
                  x := ♦ EbbRoots
                  EbbRoots -= {x>
                  if Vs e AllEbbs (s@l * x) then
                     AllEbbs u= -[<x,Build_Ebb(x,Succ,Pred)»
                  fi
               od
            end    || Build_All_Ebbs

            begin
               Build_All_Ebbs(entry,Succ,Pred)
            end

 FIG. 7.7   (continued)




 FIG. 7.8 Flowgraph with extended basic blocks indicated by the dashed boxes.



.2          Depth-First Search, Preorder Traversal, Postorder
            Traversal, and B readth-First Search
            This section concerns four graph-theoretic concepts that are important to several of
            the algorithms we use below. All four apply to rooted, directed graphs and, thus, to
178              Control-Flow Analysis




      FIG. 7.9 (a) A rooted directed graph, and (b) a depth-first presentation of it.


                 flowgraphs. The first is depth-first search, which visits the descendants of a node
                 in the graph before visiting any of its siblings that are not also its descendants. For
                 example, given the graph in Figure 7.9(a), Figure 7.9(b) is a depth-first presentation
                 of it. The number assigned to each node in a depth-first search is the node’s depth-
                 first number.
                      The algorithm in Figure 7.10 constructs a depth-first presentation of the graph.
                 The depth-first presentation includes all the graph’s nodes and the edges that make
                 up the depth-first order displayed as a tree (called a depth-first spanning tree) and the
                 other edges—the ones that are not part of the depth-first order—displayed in such a
                 way as to distinguish them from the tree edges (we use dashed lines instead of solid
                 lines for them). The edges that are part of the depth-first spanning tree are called tree
                 edges. The edges that are not part of the depth-first spanning tree are divided into
                 three classes called forward edges (which we label “ F” in examples) that go from a
                 node to a direct descendant, but not along a tree edge; back edges (which we label
                 “ B” ) that go from a node to one of its ancestors in the tree; and cross edges (which
                 we label “ C” ) that connect nodes such that neither is an ancestor of the other.
                       Note that the depth-first presentation of a graph is not unique. For example,
                 the graph in Figure 7.11(a) has the two different depth-first presentations shown in
                 Figure 7.11(b) and (c).
                      The routine D ep th _F irst_Search ( ) in Figure 7.10 does a generic depth-first
                 search of a flowgraph and provides four points to perform actions:

            1.   P rocess_B ef o re( ) allows us to perform an action before visiting each node.
            2.   P ro ce ss_ A fter( ) allows us to perform an action after visiting each node.
            3.   P rocess_Su cc_B efore( ) allows us to perform an action before visiting each suc­
                 cessor of a node.
            4.   Process_Succ_Af t e r ( ) allows us to perform an action after visiting each successor
                 of a node.
            Section 7.2    Depth-First, Preorder, Postorder, and Breadth-First Searches            179

            N: set of Node
            r , i: Node
            Visit: Node — > boolean

            procedure Depth_First.Search(N,Succ,x)
                N: in set of Node
                Succ: in Node — > set of Node
               x : in Node
            begin
               y : Node
                Process.Before(x)
               Visit(x) := true
                for each y e Succ(x) do
                   if !Visit(y) then
                       Process_Succ_Before(y)
                       Depth.First.Search(N,Succ,y)
                       Process_Succ_After(y)
                   fi
                od
               Process.After(x)
            end      II Depth_First_Search

            begin
                for each i e N do
                   Visit(i) := false
                od
               Depth.F irst.Search(N,Succ,r)
            end

FIG. 7.10 A generic depth-first search routine.



                  A            A                  A




            D         C        D        C                  D
            (a)                (b)                (c)
FIG. 7.11   (a) A rooted directed graph and (b) and (c) two distinct depth-first presentations of it.


                The second and third notions we need are two traversals of the nodes of a
            rooted, directed graph and the orders they induce in the set of nodes of the graph.
            Let G = (N, £ , r) be a rooted, directed graph. Let £ ' c £ be the set of edges in a
            depth-first presentation of G without the back edges. Then a preorder traversal of
            the graph G is a traversal in which each node is processed before its descendants,
            as defined by £ '. For example, en try , Bl, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, e x i t is a preorder
180           Control-Flow Analysis


              N: set of Node
              r, x: Node
              i := 1, j := 1: integer
              Pre, Post: Node — > integer
              Visit: Node — > boolean
              EType: (Node x Node) — > enum {tree,forward,back,cross}

              procedure Depth_First_Search_PP(N,Succ,x)
                 N: in set of Node
                 Succ: in Node — > set of Node
                 x : in Node
              begin
                 y : in Node
                 Visit(x) := true
                 Pre(x) := j
                 j +=1
                  for each y e Succ(x) do
                     if !Visit(y) then
                        Depth_First_Search_PP(N,Succ,y)
                        EType(x -> y) := tree
                     elif Pre(x) < Pre(y) then
                        Etype(x -> y) :* forward
                     elif Post(y) = 0 then
                        EType(x -> y) := back
                     else
                        EType(x    y) := cross
                     fi
                  od
                 Post(x) := i
                  i += 1
              end     II Depth_First_Search_PP

              begin
                  for each x e N do
                     Visit(x) := false
                  od
                 Depth_First_Search_PP(N,Succ,r)
              end

  FIG. 7.12   Computing a depth-first spanning tree, preorder traversal, and postorder traversal.


              traversal of the graph in Figure 7.4. The sequence en try , Bl, B3, B2, B4, B6, B5,
              e x i t is another preorder traversal of the graph in Figure 7.4.
                     Let G and £ ' be as above. Then a postorder traversal of the graph G is a traversal
              in which each node is processed after its descendants, as defined by £'. For example,
              e x i t , B5, B6, B4, B3, B2, Bl, en try is a postorder traversal of the graph in Figure 7.4,
              and e x i t , B6, B5, B2, B4, B3, Bl, en try is another one.
                     The routine D ep th _ F irst_ Search _ P P ( ) given in Figure 7.12 is a specific in­
              stance of depth-first search that computes both a depth-first spanning tree and
           Section 7.3    Dominators and Postdominators                                      181


           i := 2: integer
           procedure Breadth_First(N,Succ,s) returns Node — > integer
              N: in set of Node
              Succ: in Node —> set of Node
              s: in Node
           begin
              t : Node
              T := 0: set of Node
              Order: Node —> integer
              Order(r) := 1
              for each t e Succ(s) do
                  if Order(t) = nil then
                     Order(t) := i
                     i += 1
                     T u= {t}
                  fi
              od
              for each t e T do
                  Breadth.First(N,Succ,t)
              od
              return Order
           end     II Breadth_First

FIG* 7*13 Computing a breadth-first order.



           preorder and postorder traversals of the graph G = (N, E) with root r € N . Af­
           ter Depth_First_Search_PP( ) has been executed, the depth-first spanning tree is
           given by starting at the root and following the edges e with Etype(e) = tree. The
           preorder and postorder numbers assigned to the nodes are the integers stored into
           Pre ( ) and Post ( ), respectively.
                The fourth notion is breadth-first search, in which all of a node’s immediate
           descendants are processed before any of their unprocessed descendants. The order
           in which nodes are visited in a breadth-first search is a breadth-first order. For our
           example in Figure 7.9, the order 1, 2, 6, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 is a breadth-first order.
                The ican code in Figure 7.13 constructs a breadth-first ordering of the nodes of
           a flowgraph when it is called as Breadth_First (N,Succ,r).



.3         Dominators and Postdominators
           To determine the loops in a flowgraph, we first define a binary relation called
           dominance on flowgraph nodes. We say that node d dominates node /, written
           d dom /, if every possible execution path from entry to i includes d. Clearly, dom
           is reflexive (every node dominates itself), transitive (if a dom b and b dom c, then
           a dom c), and antisymmetric (if a dom b and b dom a , then b = a). We further
           define the subrelation called immediate dominance (idom) such that for a ^ b,
182          Control-Flow Analysis


             procedure Dom_Comp(N,Pred,r) returns Node — > set of Node
                N: in set of Node
                Pred: in Node — > set of Node
                r: in Node
             begin
                D, T: set of Node
                n, p: Node
                 change := true: boolean
                Domin: Node —> set of Node
                Domin(r) := {r}
                for each n e N - {r} do
                    Domin(n) := N
                od
                repeat
                    change := false
             *      for each n e N - {r} do
                       T := N
                       for each p e Pred(n) do
                          T n= Domin(p)
                       od
                       D := {n} u T
                       if D * Domin(n) then
                          change := true
                          Domin(n) := D
                       fi
                    od
                until !change
                return Domin
             end     II Dom_Comp

  FIG* 7*14 A simple approach to computing all the dominators of each node in a flowgraph.



             a idom b if and only if a dom b and there does not exist a node c such that c ^ a
             and c ^ b for which a dom c and c dom b, and we write idom(b) to denote the
             immediate dominator of b. Clearly the immediate dominator of a node is unique.
             The immediate dominance relation forms a tree of the nodes of a flowgraph whose
             root is the entry node, whose edges are the immediate dominances, and whose paths
             display all the dominance relationships. Further, we say that d strictly dominates /,
             written d sdom /, if d dominates i and d ± i.
                  We also say that node p postdominates node /, written p pdom /, if every possible
             execution path from i to e x it includes p, i.e., i dom p in the flowgraph with all the
             edges reversed and entry and e x it interchanged.
                  We give two approaches to computing the set of dominators of each node in
             a flowgraph. The basic idea of the first approach is that node a dominates node b
             if and only if a = fe, or a is the unique immediate predecessor of fe, or b has more
             than one immediate predecessor and for all immediate predecessors c of b , c ^ a and
             a dominates c. The algorithm is Dom_Comp( ) given in Figure 7.14, which stores in
Section 7.3    Dominators and Postdominators                                         183


Domin (/) the set of all nodes that dominate node /. It is most efficient if the fo r loop
marked with an asterisk processes the nodes of the flowgraph in a depth-first order.
     As an example of the use of Dom_Comp( ), we apply it to the flowgraph in
Figure 7.4. The algorithm first initializes change = true, Domin(entry) = {entry},
and Domin(i) = {entry,B1 ,B2,B3,B4,B5,B6,exit> for each node i other than
entry. Then it enters the repeat loop, where it sets change = false and enters the for
loop within it. The for loop sets n = Bl and T = {entry ,B1 ,B2,B3,B4,B5,B6,exit}
and enters the inner for loop. The inner for loop sets p = entry (the only member
of Pred(Bl)) and so sets T = {entry}. The inner for loop then terminates, D is set
to {entry,Bl}, change to true, and Domin(Bl) = {entry,Bl}. Next the outer for
loop sets n = B2, T = {entry,B1 ,B2,B3,B4,B5,B6,exit}, and enters the inner for
loop. Since Pred(B2) = {Bl}, the inner for loop sets T to {entry,Bl}. Then D is set
to {entry,Bl,B2} and Domin(B2) = {entry,Bl,B2}. Continuing the process results
in the following:
    i          Domin(i)

    entry      {entry}
    Bl         {entry,B1}
    B2         {entry,B1,B2}
    B3         {entry,B1,B3}
    B4         {entry,B1,B3,B4}
    B5         {entry,Bl,B3,B4,B5}
    B6         {entry,Bl,B3,B4,B6}
    exit       {entry,B1,exit}
     If we need the immediate dominator of each node, we can compute it by the
routine given in Figure 7.15. As for the previous algorithm, the greatest efficiency
is achieved by having the for loop that is marked with an asterisk process the
nodes of the flowgraph in depth-first order. The algorithm can be implemented with
reasonable efficiency by representing the sets by bit vectors, with a running time that
is 0 ( n 2e) for a flowgraph with n nodes and e edges. In essence, the algorithm first
sets TmpC/) to Domin(/) - {i} and then checks for each node /whether each element
in TmpC/) has dominators other than itself and, if so, removes them from TmpC/). As
an example of the use of Idom_Comp( ), we apply it to the just computed dominator
sets for the flowgraph in Figure 7.4. The algorithm initializes the TmpC ) array to the
following:
    i          Tmp(i)

    entry      0
    Bl         {entry}
    B2         {entry,B1}
    B3         {entry,B1}
    B4         {entry,B1,B3}
    B5         {entry,Bl,B3,B4}
    B6         {entry,B1,B3,B4}
    exit       {entry,B1}
184          Control-Flow Analysis


             procedure Idom_Comp(N,Domin,r) returns Node — > Node
                N: in set of Node
                Domin: in Node — > set of Node
                r: in Node
             begin
                n, s, t: Node
                Tmp: Node — > set of Node
                 Idom: Node — > Node
                for each n e N do
                    Tmp(n) := Domin(n) - {n}
                od
             * for each n e N - {r} do
                    for each s e Tmp(n) do
                        for each t e Tmp(n) - {s} do
                           if t e Tmp(s) then
                              Tmp(n) -= {t}
                           fi
                        od
                    od
                od
                for each n e N - {r} do
                    Idom(n) := ♦Tmp(n)
                od
                return Idom
             end      II Idom_Comp

  FIG* 7.15 Computing immediate dominators, given sets of dominators.



             Next it sets n = B1 and s = entry and finds that Tmp(Bl) - {e n try } = 0, so Tmp(Bl)
             is left unchanged. Then it sets n = B2. For s = entry, Tmp (entry) is empty, so
             Tmp(B2) is not changed. On the other hand, for s = Bl, Tmp(Bl) is {en try } and
             it is removed from Tmp(B2), leaving Tmp(B2) = {Bl}, and so on. The final values of
             TmpC ) are as follows:


                 i         Tmp(i)

                 entry     0
                 Bl        {entry}
                 B2        {Bl}
                 B3        {Bl}
                 B4        {B3}
                 B5        {B4}
                 B6        {B4}
                 exit      {Bl}


             The last action of Idom_Comp( ) before returning is to set Idom(«) to the single
             element of Tmp(«) for n ^ r .
     Section 7.3     Dominators and Postdominators                                            185


          The second approach to computing dominators was developed by Lengauer
     and Tarjan [LenT79]. It is more complicated than the first approach, but it has the
     advantage of running significantly faster on all but the smallest flowgraphs.
          Note that, for a rooted directed graph (N, E, r), node v is an ancestor of node w
     if v = w or there is a path from v to w in the graph’s depth-first spanning tree, and v
     is a proper ancestor o iw iiv is an ancestor of w and v ^ w . Also, we use Dfn(v) to
     denote the depth-first number of node v.
          The algorithm Domin_Fast ( ) is given in Figure 7.16, and Figures 7.17 and 7.18
     contain auxiliary procedures. Given a flowgraph with its Succ( ) and Pred( ) func­
     tions, the algorithm ultimately stores in Idom(v) the immediate dominator of each
     node v ^ r .
          The algorithm first initializes some data structures (discussed below) and then
     performs a depth-first search of the graph, numbering the nodes as they are encoun­
     tered, i.e., in a depth-first order. It uses a node nO £ N.
          Next it computes, for each node w ^ r , a so-called semidominator of w and sets
     Sdno(w) to the semidominator’s depth-first number. The semidominator of a node
     w other than r is the node v with minimal depth-first number such that there is a
     path from v = vq to w = v£, say               • . . , V k - \^ vk’> such that Dfn(vj) < Dfn(w)
     for 1 < i < k — 1.
          Depth-first ordering and semidominators have several useful properties, as
     follows:
1.   For any two nodes v and w in a rooted directed graph with Dfn(v) < Dfn(w), any
     path from v to tv must include a common ancestor of v and w in the flowgraph’s
     depth-first spanning tree. Figure 7.19 shows the relationship between v and w for
     Dfn(v) < Dfn(w) to be satisfied, where w may be in any of the positions of i/, a,
     fc, or c, where b is a descendant of an ancestor u of v such that Dfn(b) > Dfn(v).
     A dotted arrow indicates a possibly empty path, and a dashed arrow represents a
     non-empty path. If w = v or a 9 then v is the common ancestor. Otherwise, u is the
     common ancestor.
2.   For any node w ^ r , w9s semidominator is a proper ancestor of w and the immediate
     dominator of w is an ancestor of its semidominator.34
3.   Let E' denote E with the non-tree edges replaced by edges from the semidominator
     of each node to the node. Then the dominators of the nodes in (N, E', r) are the same
     as the dominators in (N, E, r).
4.   Let

           V(w) = { Dfn(v) | v->w e E and Dfn{v) < Dfn(w)}

     and
           S(w) = {Sdno(u) | Dfn(u) > Dfn(w) and for some v € N , v^>w e E
                      and there is a path from u t o v e E }
     Then the semidominator of w is the node with depth-first number min(V{w) U S(w)).
         Note that we do not actually compute the semidominator of each node v> but,
     rather, just its depth-first number Sdno(v).
186          Control-Flow Analysis

             Label, Parent, Ancestor, Child: Node — > Node
             Ndfs: integer — > Node
             Dfn, Sdno, Size: Node — > integer
             n: integer
             Succ, Pred, Bucket: Node — > set of Node

             procedure Domin_Fast(N,r,Idom)
                N: in set of Node
                r: in Node
                Idom: out Node — > Node
             begin
                u, v, w: Node
                i : integer
                I| initialize data structures and perform depth-first search
                for each v e N u {nO} do
                    Bucket(v) := 0
                    Sdno(v) := 0
                od
                Size(nO) := Sdno(nO) := 0
                Ancestor(nO) := Label(nO)      nO
                n := 0
                Depth_First_Search_Dom(r)
             *1 for i := n by -1 to 2 do
                    I| compute initial values for semidominators and store
                    I| nodes with the same semidominator in the same bucket
                    w := Ndfs(i)
                    for each v e Pred(w) do
                       u := Eval(v)
                       if Sdno(u) < Sdno(w) then
                          Sdno(w) := Sdno(u)
                       fi
                    od
                    Bucket(Ndfs(Sdno(w))) u= {w>
                    Link(Parent(w),w)
                    I| compute immediate dominators for nodes in the bucket
                    II of w ’s parent
             *2     while Bucket(Parent(w)) * 0 do
                       v :* ♦Bucket(Parent(w)); Bucket(Parent(w)) -= {v>
                       u := Eval(v)
                       if Sdno(u) < Sdno(v) then
                          Idom(v) := u
                       else
                          Idom(v) := Parent(w)
                       fi
                    od
                od

  FIG. 7.16 A more complicated but faster approach to computing dominators.
            Section 7.3   Dom inators and Postdominators                                     187

                II adjust immediate dominators of nodes whose current version of
                I| the immediate dominator differs from the node with the depth-first
                I| number of the node’s semidominator
            *3     for i := 2 to n do
                   w :* Ndfs(i)
                   if Idom(w) * Ndfs(Sdno(w)) then
                      Idom(w) := Idom(Idom(w))
                   fi
            *4 od
            end    || Domin_Fast

FIG. 7.16   (continuedj


            procedure Depth_First_Search_Dom(v)
                v: in Node
            begin
                w: Node
                II perform depth-first search and initialize data structures
                Sdno(v) := n += 1
                Ndfs(n) := Label(v) := v
                Ancestor(v) := Child(v) := nO
                Size(v) := 1
                for each w e Succ(v) do
                   if Sdno(w) = 0 then
                       Parent(w) := v
                       Depth_First_Search_Dom(w)
                   fi
                od
            end      || Depth_First_Search_Dom

            procedure Compress(v)
               v: in Node
            begin
                I| compress ancestor path to node v to the node whose
                II label has the maximal semidominator number
                if Ancestor(Ancestor( v ) ) * nO then
                   Compress(Ancestor(v ) )
                   if Sdno(Label(Ancestor(v ) )) < Sdno(Label( v ) ) then
                      Label(v) := Label(Ancestor( v ) )
                   fi
                   Ancestor(v) := Ancestor(Ancestor(v))
               fi
            end     || Compress

FIG. 7.17 Depth-first search and path-compression algorithms used in computing dominators.
188           Control-Flow Analysis

              procedure Eval(v) returns Node
                  v : in Node
              begin
                  I| determine the ancestor of v whose semidominator
                  II has the minimal depth-first number
                  if Ancestor(v) = nO then
                         return Label(v)
                  else
                      Compress(v)
                      if Sdno(Label(Ancestor(v))) £ Sdno(Label(v)) then
                          return Label(v)
                      else
                          return Label(Ancestor(v))
                      fi
                 fi
              end      II Eval

             procedure Link(v,w)
                 v, w: in Node
             begin
                 s := w, tmp: Node
                 I| rebalance the forest of trees maintained
                 II by the Child and Ancestor data structures
                 while Sdno(Label(w)) < Sdno(Label(Child(s))) do
                    if Size(s) + Size(Child(Child(s)))
                        ^ 2*Size(Child(s)) then
                        Ancestor(Child(s)) := s
                        Child(s) := Child(Child(s))
                    else
                        Size(Child(s)) := Size(s)
                        s := Ancestor(s) := Child(s)
                    fi
                 od
                 Label(s) := Label(w)
                 Size(v) += Size(w)
                 if Size(v) < 2*Size(w) then
                    tmp := s
                    s := Child(v)
                    Child(v) := tmp
                 fi
                while s * nO do
                    Ancestor(s) := v
                    s := Child(s)
                 od
             end      II Link

  FIG. 7.18 Label evaluation and linking algorithms used in computing dominators.
             Section 7.3    Dominators and Postdominators                                           189
             u
             i
             i    ^
             T
             v        b
                      i
                      i

             T        T
             a        c
FIG* 7.19 For v and tv to satisfy Dfn(v) < Dfn(w), w may be in any of the positions of z/, a, byor c,
          where b is some descendant of u visited after all the tree descendants of v. A dotted arrow
          represents a possibly empty path, and a dashed arrow represents a non-empty path.

                  After computing Sdno(v), for each non-root node z/, the algorithm implicitly
             defines its immediate dominator as follows: Let u be a node whose semidominator
             w has minimal depth-first number among all nodes u such that there is a non­
             empty path from w to u and a path from u to v, both in the depth-first spanning
             tree. Then the immediate dominator Idom(v) of v is the semidominator of v if
             Sdno(v) = Sdno{u), or else it is Idom(u).
                  Finally, the algorithm explicitly sets Idom(v) for each z/, processing the nodes in
             depth-first order.
                  The main data structures used in the algorithm are as follows:
        1.   N dfs(i) is the node whose depth-first number is /.
        2.   Succ (v) is the set of successors of node v.
        3.   Pred(z/) is the set of predecessors of node v.
        4.   Parent (z/) is the node that is the parent of node v in the depth-first spanning tree.
        5.   Sdno(z/) is the depth-first number of the semidominator of node v.
        6.   Idom(z/) is the immediate dominator of node v.
        7.   Bucket (z/) is the set of nodes whose semidominator is Ndf s ( v ).
             The routines Link( ) and E v al( ) maintain an auxiliary data structure, namely, a
             forest of trees within the depth-first spanning tree that keeps track of nodes that
             have been processed. E v al( ) uses Compress ( ) to perform path compression on
             paths leading from a node by means of the A ncestor ( ) function (see below) to the
             root of the depth-first spanning tree. It consists of two data structures, namely,
        1.   Ancestor (v) is an ancestor of v in the forest or is nO if v is a tree root in the forest,
             and
        2.   Label (v) is a node in the ancestor chain of v such that the depth-first number of its
             semidominator is minimal.
             Finally, C h ild (v) and S iz e (v) are two data structures that are used to keep the trees
             in the forest balanced, and thus achieve the low time bound of the algorithm. With
             the use of balanced trees and path compression, this dominator-finding algorithm
             has a run-time bound of 0 (e • a (e ,« ) ) , where n and e are the numbers of nodes
             and edges, respectively, in the graph, and a { ) is a very slowly growing function—
             essentially a functional inverse of Ackermann’s function. Without the use of balanced
190   Control-Flow Analysis


      trees, the Link( ) and E v a l( ) functions are significantly simpler, but the running
      time is 0 (e • log n).
           For a more detailed description of how this algorithm works, see Lengauer and
      Tarj an [LenT79].
           As an example of using the Domin_Fast ( ) algorithm, we apply it to the flow-
      graph in Figure 7.4.
           After the call from Domin_Fast( ) to Depth_First_Search_Dom( ) has re­
      turned (i.e., at the point marked *1 in Figure 7.16), the values of Ndf s ( ), Sdom( ),
      and Idom( ) are as follows:
          j     N d fs (j)    S d n o (N d fs(j))   Id o m (N d fs(j))

          1     en try        1                     nO
          2     B1            2                     nO
          3     B2            3                     nO
          4     e x it        4                     nO
          5     B3            5                     nO
          6     B4            6                     nO
          7     B5            7                     nO
          8     B6            8                     nO
      Next we show a series of snapshots of values that have changed from the previous
      listing, all at the point labeled *2. For i = 8, the changed line is

          j     N d fs(j)     S d n o (N d fs(j))   Id om (N dfs(j))
          8     B6            8                     B5
      For i == 7, the changed lines are

          j     N d fs(j)     S d n o (N d fs(j))   Idom (N dfs(j))
          7     B5            6                     nO
          8     B6            8                     B4
      For i == 6, the changed lines are

          j     N d fs(j)     S d n o (N d fs(j))   Idom (N dfs(j))
          6     B4            5                     nO
          7     B5            6                     B4
      For i == 5, the changed lines are

          j     N d fs(j)     S d n o (N d fs(j))   Id o m (N d fs(j))
          5     B3            2                     nO
          6     B4            5                     B3
      For i == 4, the changed lines are

           j    N d fs(j)     S d n o (N d fs(j))   Id om (N dfs(j))
          4     e x it        2                     nO
          5     B3            2                     B1
Section 7.4      Loops and Strongly Connected Components                          191

For i = 3, the changed lines are

    j     Ndfs(j)       Sdno(Ndfs(j))       Idom(Ndfs(j))
    3     B2            3                   nO
    4     exit          2                   nO
For i = 2, the changed lines are

    j     Ndfs(j)       Sdno(Ndfs(j))       Idom(Ndfs(j))
    2     B1            2                   nO
    3     B2            2                   B1
At both point *3 and point *4 in Domin_Fast( ), the values for all nodes are as
follows:

    j     Ndfs(j)       Sdno(Ndfs(j))       Idom(Ndfs(j))
    1     entry         1                   nO
    2     B1            1                   entry
    3     B2            2                   B1
    4     exit          2                   B1
    5     B3            2                   B1
    6     B4            5                   B3
    7     B5            6                   B4
    8     B6            6                   B4
and the values of Idom( ) match those computed by the first method.
    Alstrup and Lauridsen [AlsL96] describe a technique for incrementally updating
a dominator tree as the control flow of a procedure is modified. For the first time,
the computational complexity of their technique makes it better than rebuilding the
dominator tree from scratch.


Loops and Strongly Connected Components
Next, we define a back edge in a flowgraph as one whose head dominates its
tail. Note that this notion of back edge is more restrictive than the one defined in
Section 7.2. For example, the rooted directed graph in Figure 7.20(a) has as one of
its depth-first presentations the graph in Figure 7.20(b), which has a back edge from
d to c such that c does not dominate d. While this back edge does define a loop, the
loop has two entry points (c and d), so it is not a natural loop.
      Given a back edge ra->w, the natural loop of m-^n is the subgraph consisting of
the set of nodes containing n and all the nodes from which m can be reached in the
flowgraph without passing through n and the edge set connecting all the nodes in its
node set. Node n is the loop header. We can construct the node set of the natural
loop of m^>n by the algorithm Nat_Loop( ) in Figure 7.21. Given the graph and the
back edge, this algorithm stores the set of nodes in the loop in Loop. Computing the
set of edges of the loop, if needed, is easy from there.
      Many of the optimizations we consider require moving code from inside a loop
to just before its header. To guarantee that we uniformly have such a place available,
192             C o n tro l-F lo w A n aly sis




  FIG . 7.2 0   (a) A rooted directed graph and (b) a depth-first presentation of it.


                procedure Nat_Loop(m,n,Pred) returns set of Node
                    m, n: in Node
                    Pred: in Node — > set of Node
                begin
                    Loop: set of Node
                    Stack: sequence of Node
                    p, q: Node
                    Stack := []
                    Loop := {m,n}
                    if m * n then
                       Stack ®= [m]
                    fi
                   while Stack * [] do
                        I| add predecessors of m that are not predecessors of n
                        I| to the set of nodes in the loop; since n dominates m,
                        II this only adds nodes in the loop
                       p := Stackl-1
                       Stack ©= -1
                       for each q e Pred(p) do
                           if q £ Loop then
                              Loop u= {q>
                              Stack    [q]
                           fi
                       od
                    od
                   return Loop
                end      II Nat_Loop

  FIG. 7.21     Computing the natural loop of back edge m -> «.
           Section 7.4      Loops and Strongly Connected Components                           193




FIG. 7.22 Example loop (a) without and (b) with preheader.



                          i s
                         Bl

             , /
              B2                BS
           ___ 1                 1

FIG. 7.23 Two natural loops with the same header Bl.

           we introduce the concept of a prebeader; which is a new (initially empty) block
           placed just before the header of a loop, such that all the edges that previously went to
           the header from outside the loop now go to the preheader, and there is a single new
           edge from the preheader to the header. Figure 7.22(b) shows the result of introducing
           a preheader for the loop in Figure 7.22(a).
                It is not hard to see that unless two natural loops have the same header they
           are either disjoint or one is nested within the other. On the other hand, given two
           loops with the same header, as in Figure 7.23, it is often not clear whether one is
           nested in the other (and if so, which is nested in which), or whether they make up
           just one loop. If they resulted from the code in Figure 7.24(a), it would be clear that
           the left loop was the inner one; if, on the other hand, they resulted from the code in
           Figure 7.24(b), they more likely make up one loop together. Given that we cannot
           distinguish these two situations without knowing more about the source code, we
           treat such situations in this section as comprising single loops (structural analysis,
           discussed in Section 7.7, will treat them differently).
                A natural loop is only one type of strongly connected component of a flowgraph.
           There may be other looping structures that have more than one entry point, as we
           will see in Section 7.5. While such multiple-entry loops occur rarely in practice, they
           do occur, so we must take them into account.
                The most general looping structure that may occur is a strongly connected
           component (SCC) of a flowgraph, which is a subgraph Gs = (N$, Es) such that every
194           Control-Flow Analysis


                    i = 1;                              Bl:   if (i < j)
              Bl:   if (i >= 100)                                goto B2;
                         goto b4;                             else if (i > j)
                    else if ((i # /« 10) == 0)                   goto B3;
                         goto B3;                             else goto B4;
                    else                                B2:
             B2:                                              i++;
                        i++;                                  goto Bl;
                        goto Bl;                        B3:
             B3:                                              i— ;
                    i++;                                      goto Bl;
                    goto Bl;                            B4:
             B4:
              (a)                                       (b)

  FIG. 7.24 Alternative C code sequences that would both produce the flowgraph in Figure 7.23.




  FIG. 7.25 A flowgraph with two strongly connected components, one maximal and one not
            maximal.



             node in N$ is reachable from every other node by a path that includes only edges
             in £ 5 .
                  A strongly connected component is maximal if every strongly connected com­
             ponent containing it is the component itself. As an example, consider the flowgraph
             in Figure 7.25. The subgraph consisting of Bl, B2, and B3 and the edges connecting
             them make up a maximal strongly connected component, while the subgraph con­
             sisting of the node B2 and the edge B2->B2 is a strongly connected component, but
             not a maximal one.
                  The algorithm Strong_Components(r,Succ) in Figure 7.26 gives a method for
             computing all the maximal SCCs of a flowgraph with entry node r. It is a version of
             Tarjan’s algorithm, and it computes the SCCs in time linear in the number of nodes
             and edges in the flowgraph. The function Dfn: Node — > integer is a depth-first
             order of the nodes in N.
            Section 7.4   Loops and Strongly Connected Components             195

            N: set of Node
            NextDfn: integer
            A11_SCC: set of set of Node
            LowLink, Dfn: Node — > integer
            Stack: sequence of Node

            procedure Strong_Components(x,Succ)
                x: in Node
                Succ: in Node — > set of Node
            begin
                i: integer
                y, z: Node
                SCC: set of Node
                LowLink(x) := Dfn(x) := NextDfn += 1
                Stack ®= [x]
                for each y e Succ(x) do
                     if Dfn(y) = 0 then
                         Strong_Components(y,Succ)
                         LowLink(x) := min(LowLink(x),LowLink(y))
                     elif Dfn(y) < Dfn(x) & 3i e integer (y = Stackii) then
                         LowLink(x) := min(LowLink(x),Dfn(y))
                     fi
                od
                if LowLink(x) = Dfn(x) then II x is the root of an SCC
                     SCC := 0
                     while Stack * [] do
                         z := Stackl-1
                         if Dfn(z) < Dfn(x) then
                             All.SCC u= {SCC}
                             return
                         fi
                         Stack ©= -1
                         SCC u= {z}
                     od
                     All.SCC u= {SCC}
                fi
            end     |I Strong_Components

            begin
                x: Node
                for each x e N do
                    Dfn(x) := LowLink(x) := 0
                od
                NextDfn := 0; Stack := []
                All.SCC := 0
                for each x e N do
                    if Dfn(x) = 0 then
                        Strong_Components(x,Succ)
                    fi
                od
                All.SCC u= {{Stackll}}
            end

FIG. 7.26   Computing strongly connected components.
196   Control-Flow Analysis


          The idea of the algorithm is as follows: For any node n in an SCC, let LowLink(rc)
      be the smallest preorder number of any node m in the SCC such that there is a
      path from n to m in the depth-first spanning tree of the containing graph with at
      most one back or cross edge in the path. Let LL (n) be the node with preorder
      value LowLink(n), and let no be n and         \ be LL («,•). Eventually we must have,
      for some /, «/+ i = n*•; call this node LLend(w). Tarjan shows that LLend(w) is the
      lowest-numbered node in preorder in the maximal SCC containing «, and so it is
      the root in the given depth-first spanning tree of the graph whose set of nodes is the
      SCC containing n. Computing LLend(w) separately for each n would require more
      than linear time; Tarjan modifies this approach to make it work in linear time by
      computing LowLink(w) and using it to determine the nodes n that satisfy n = LL(«),
      and hence n = LLend(w).


7.5   Reducibility
      Reducibility is a very important property of flowgraphs, and one that is most likely
      misnamed. The term reducible results from several kinds of transformations that
      can be applied to flowgraphs that collapse subgraphs into single nodes and, hence,
      “ reduce” the flowgraph successively to simpler graphs, with a flowgraph considered
      to be reducible if applying a sequence of such transformations ultimately reduces
      it to a single node. A better name would be well-structured and the definition of
      reducibility we use makes this notion clear, but, given the weight of history, we use
      the term reducible interchangeably. A flowgraph G = (N, E) is reducible or well-
      structured if and only if E can be partitioned into disjoint sets E f, the forward edge
      set, and Eg, the back edge set, such that (N, Ef) forms a DAG in which each node
      can be reached from the entry node, and the edges in E b are all back edges as defined
      in Section 7.4. Another way of saying this is that if a flowgraph is reducible, then
      all the loops in it are natural loops characterized by their back edges and vice versa.
      It follows from this definition that in a reducible flowgraph there are no jumps into
      the middles of loops—each loop is entered only through its header.
           Certain control-flow patterns make flowgraphs irreducible. Such patterns are
      called improper regions, and, in general, they are multiple-entry strongly connected
      components of a flowgraph. In fact, the simplest improper region is the two-entry
      loop shown in Figure 7.27(a), and the one in Figure 7.27(b) generalizes it to a three-
      entry loop; it’s easy to see how to produce an infinite sequence of (comparatively
      simple) distinct improper regions beginning with these two.
           The syntax rules of some programming languages, such as Modula-2 and its
      descendants and b l iss , allow only procedures with reducible flowgraphs to be con­
      structed. This is true in most other languages as well, as long as we avoid gotos,
      specifically gotos into loop bodies. Statistical studies of flowgraph structure have
      shown that irreducibility is infrequent, even in languages like Fortran 77 that make
      no effort to restrict control-flow constructs4 and in programs written over 2 0 years
      ago, before structured programming became a serious concern: two studies have

      4. This is not quite true. The Fortran 77 standard does specifically prohibit branching into do loops,
      but it places no restrictions on branching into loops made up of ifs and gotos.
            Section 7.6    Interval Analysis and Control Trees                                  197




           (a)                         (b)

FIG. 7.27 Simple improper regions.




FIG. 7.28 Result of applying node splitting to B3 in the improper region shown in Figure 7.27(a).

            found that over 90% of a selection of real-world Fortran 77 programs have reducible
            control flow and that all of a set of 50 large Fortran 6 6 programs are reducible. Thus,
            irreducible flowgraphs occur only rarely in practice, and so one could almost ignore
            their existence. However, they do occur, so we must make sure our approaches to
            control- and data-flow analysis are capable of dealing with them.
                 There are three practical approaches to dealing with irreducibility in the control-
            tree-based approaches to data-flow analysis discussed in Section 8 .6 (which depend
            on flowgraphs being reducible). One is to do iterative data-flow analysis, as de­
            scribed in Section 8.4, on irreducible regions and to plug the results into the data­
            flow equations for the rest of the flowgraph. The second is to use a technique called
            node splitting that transforms irreducible regions into reducible ones. If we split node
            B3 in the example in Figure 7.27(a), the result is the flowgraph in Figure 7.28: B3 has
            become a pair of nodes, B3 and B3a, and the loop is now a proper one with entry
            B2. If irreducibility were common, node splitting could be very expensive, since it
            could exponentially increase the size of the flowgraph; fortunately, this is not the
            case in practice. The third approach is to perform an induced iteration on the lattice
            of monotone functions from the lattice to itself (see Sections 8.5 and 8 .6 ).



.6          Interval A nalysis and Control Trees
            Interval analysis is a name given to several approaches to both control- and data­
            flow analysis. In control-flow analysis, interval analysis refers to dividing up the
            flowgraph into regions of various sorts (depending on the particular approach),
198           Control-Flow Analysis




  FIG. 7.29 T1-T2 transformations.


              consolidating each region into a new node (often called an abstract node, since it
              abstracts away the internal structure of the region it represents), and replacing the
              edges entering or leaving the region with edges entering or leaving the corresponding
              abstract node. A flowgraph resulting from one or more such transformations is called
              an abstract flowgraph. Since the transformations are applied either one at a time
              or to disjoint subgraphs in parallel, the resulting regions are nested in the sense
              that each abstract node corresponds to a subgraph. Thus, the result of applying a
              sequence of such transformations produces a control tree, defined as follows:
         1.   The root of the control tree is an abstract graph representing the original flowgraph.
         2.   The leaves of the control tree are individual basic blocks.
         3.   The nodes between the root and the leaves are abstract nodes representing regions
              of the flowgraph.
         4.   The edges of the tree represent the relationship between each abstract node and the
              regions that are its descendants (and that were abstracted to form it).
                   For example, one of the simplest and historically earliest forms of interval
              analysis is known as T1-T2 analysis. It is composed of just two transformations:
              T 1 collapses a one-node self loop to a single node, and T2 collapses a sequence of
              two nodes such that the first is the only predecessor of the second to a single node,
              as shown in Figure 7.29.
                   Now suppose we are given the flowgraph shown on the left in Figure 7.30.
              Applying T 1 and T2 repeatedly, we get the sequence of reductions shown in that
              figure. The corresponding control tree is shown in Figure 7.31.
                   As originally defined, interval analysis used what are known as maximal inter­
              vals and ignored the existence of irreducible or improper regions. A maximal interval
              lM(b) with header h is the maximal, single-entry subgraph with h as its only entry
              node and with all closed paths in the subgraph containing h. In essence, Im (^) is the
              natural loop with entry h, plus some acyclic structure dangling from its exits. For
              example, in Figure 7.4, 7m (B4) is {B4,B6,B5,exit>; B6 is included because the only
           Section 7.6    Interval Analysis and Control Trees                                199



              i
              B1



              B2
                                       \i
                                      B la                      B la


               k          T2            u                                   72
              B3     |                B3a |                     B3b



              B4
                                                                T
FIG. 7.30 Example of T1-T2 transformations.



                           B ib



                   B la              B3b



                                     B3a




FIG. 7.31 T1-T2 control tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.30.


           closed path containing B4 is the one consisting of B4 -> B6 and B6 -> B4, and B5 and
           e x it are included because the subgraph would not be maximal otherwise.
                 A more modern form of interval analysis, which we concentrate on in the
           remainder of this section, identifies the loops in the flowgraph without classifying
           other types of control structures. In this context, a minimal interval (or simply an
           interval) I is defined to be (1) a natural loop, (2) a maximal acyclic subgraph, or (3)
           a minimal irreducible region. Thus, a minimal interval that is a natural loop differs
           from the corresponding maximal interval in that the latter includes successors of the
           nodes in the loop that are not themselves in the loop and that are also not headers of
           maximal intervals, while the former excludes them. For example, Figure 7.32(a) and
           (b) show the maximal and minimal intervals, respectively, in the same flowgraph.
                 A somewhat more complex example is shown in Figure 7.33. In this example,
           rather than naming the abstract subgraphs, we simply give the set of nodes com­
           prising each of them—this makes the control tree (shown in Figure 7.34) obvious.
           Basic blocks B2 and B4 form a loop, as do B5 and B6. After they have been collapsed
           to single nodes, B3 and {B5,B6> are found to make an irreducible region, which is
           collapsed. The remaining abstract graph is acyclic, and hence forms a single interval.
200            Control-Flow Analysis




  FIG. 7.32 An example of the difference between (a) maximal intervals and (b) minimal intervals.


                   Since we consider structural analysis (covered in detail in Section 7.7) to be
               superior to interval analysis, we give here only an outline of how to perform interval
               analysis .5 The basic steps are as follows:

          1.   Perform a postorder traversal of the node set of the flowgraph, looking for loop
               headers (each a single node) and headers of improper regions (each a set of more
               than one node).
         2.    For each loop header found, construct its natural loop using the algorithm
               Nat_Loop( ) given in Figure 7.21 and reduce it to an abstract region of type “ natural
               loop.”


               5. Actually, interval analysis can be viewed as a cut-down version of structural analysis that uses
               fewer types of regions or intervals. Thus, an algorithm for performing interval analysis can be
               derived from the one for structural analysis.
            Section 7.6     Interval Analysis and Control Trees   201




FIG, 7,33   Example of interval analysis.


                            {B1,{B2,B4},
                          {B3,{B5,B6}},B7}


            B1       {B2,B4}        {B3,{B5,B6}}          B7


                   B2       B4       B3      {B5,B6}


                                            B5     B6

FIG, 7.34   Control tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.33.
202        Control-Flow Analysis


      3.   For each set o f entries of an improper region, construct the minimal strongly con­
           nected component (the algorithm given in Figure 7.26 can be modified to construct
           the minimal SCC) of the flowgraph containing all the entries and reduce it to an
           abstract region of type “ improper region.”
      4.   For the en try node and for each immediate descendant of a node in a natural loop
           or in an irreducible region, construct the maximal acyclic graph with that node as
           its root; if the resulting graph has more than one node in it, reduce it to an abstract
           region of type “ acyclic region.”
      5.   Iterate this process until it terminates.
               Note that termination is guaranteed since either the flowgraph is acyclic or it
           contains one or the other type of loop: if it is acyclic, the process terminates with
           the current iteration; if it includes one or more cycles, at least one natural-loop or
           improper-region reduction will occur during each iteration, reducing the number of
           cycles in the graph by at least one, and every flowgraph contains only a finite number
           of cycles to begin with.


7.7        Structural A n alysis
           Structural analysis is a more refined form of interval analysis. Its goal is to make
           the syntax-directed method of data-flow analysis (developed by Rosen for use on
           syntax trees) applicable to lower-level intermediate code. Rosen’s method, called
           high-level data-flow analysis, has the advantage that it gives, for each type of struc­
           tured control-flow construct in a source language, a set of formulas that perform
           conventional (bit-vector) data-flow analyses across and through them much more
           efficiently than iteration does. Thus, this method extends one of the goals of op­
           timization, namely, to move work from execution time to compilation time, by
           moving work from compilation time to language-definition time— in particular,
           the data-flow equations for structured control-flow constructs are determined by
           the syntax and semantics of the language.
                Structural analysis extends this approach to arbitrary flowgraphs by discovering
           their control-flow structure and providing a way to handle improper regions. Thus,
           for example, it can take a loop made up of i f s, gotos, and assignments and discover
           that it has the form of a w hile or r e p e a t loop, even though its syntax gives no hint
           of that.
                It differs from basic interval analysis in that it identifies many more types of con­
           trol structures than just loops, forming each into a region and, as a result, provides
           a basis for doing very efficient data-flow analysis. The control tree it builds is typi­
           cally larger than for interval analysis— since more types of regions, and hence more
           regions, are identified— but the individual regions are correspondingly simpler and
           smaller. One critical concept in structural analysis is that every region it identifies has
           exactly one entry point, so that, for example, an irreducible or improper region will
           always include the lowest common dominator of the set of entries to the strongly
           connected component that is the multiple-entry cycle within the improper region.
                Figures 7.35 and 7.36 give examples of typical acyclic and cyclic control struc­
           tures, respectively, that structural analysis can recognize. Note that which of these
            Section 7.7          Structural Analysis                            203




              i
              B1

              I
              B2
                                     if-then                     if-then-else
              T

              *

              I
            block
            schema                                     case/switch schema

FIG. 7.35 Some types of acyclic regions used in structural analysis.




            self loop                    while loop




                          ~  4
                           I B1



                              B2



                          natural loop schema

FIG. 7.36 Some types of cyclic regions used in structural analysis.
204           Control-Flow Analysis




  FIG. 7.37 An acyclic region that does not fit any of the simple categories and so is identified as a
            proper interval.




              are appropriate for a given source language may vary with the choice of language
              and that there may be others. For example, the case/switch construct in a particular
              language may or may not allow each of the cases to fall through to the next case,
              rather than branching directly to the construct’s exit—in C ’s sw itch, any case may
              fall through or branch to the exit, while in Pascal’s case, all cases branch to the
              exit. Thus, the case/switch structure is really intended to be a schema that covers the
              range of possibilities. Note that a natural loop represents any reducible loop that
              is not one of the other specific reducible looping constructs (i.e., not a self or while
              loop). It too is schematic, since the loop may have more than two exit edges.
                   Similarly, the improper (or irreducible) interval is schematic, since its entry block
              may have more than two successors and it may contain more than three blocks. One
              more type of interval is used in structural analysis, namely, a proper interval, which
              is an arbitrary acyclic structure, i.e., one that contains no cycles and that cannot be
              reduced by any of the simple acyclic cases. An example of such a structure is shown
              in Figure 7.37.
                   Also, the situation represented in Figure 7.23 in which there are two back edges
              entering B1 is recognized by structural analysis as two nested while loops. Which
              one it makes the inner loop depends on the order in which they are encountered.
                   Structural analysis proceeds by constructing a depth-first spanning tree for the
              flowgraph in question and then examining the flowgraph’s nodes in postorder for
              instances of the various region types, forming abstract nodes from them and col­
              lapsing the connecting edges, and constructing the corresponding control tree in the
              process. The order in which the checking for regions of various types is done and
              the way in which it is done are important: for example, a sequence of n > 3 regions
              that make up a block can be collapsed in one step to one block if we follow the se­
              quence to both ends before forming the region, or it can be collapsed in n —1 steps
              to a hierarchy of n — 1 blocks if we only inspect the first block and its predecessor
              or successor at each step. Clearly, the former approach is preferred.
            Section 7.7      Structural Analysis                                                             205

            Succ, Pred: Node — > set of Node
            RegionType = enum {Block,IfThen,IfThenElse,Case,Proper,SelfLoop,
               WhileLoop,NaturalLoop,Improper}
            I| StructOf(n) = the region containing node n
            StructOf: Node — > Node
            I| StrucType(n) = the member of RegionType that is the type of
            II the region denoted by node n
            StructType: Node — > RegionType
            II the set of all region nodes
            Structures: set of Node
            I| StructNodes(n) = the set of nodes making up the region
            I| abstracted to node n
            StructNodes: Node — > set of Node
            I| node and edge sets of the control tree
            CTNodes: set of Node
            CTEdges: set of (Node x Node)
            I| postorder traversal of the flowgraph
            PostCtr, PostMax: integer
            Post: integer — > Node
            Visit: Node — > boolean

FIG. 7.38   Global data structures used in structural analysis.



                 Follow ing Sharir [Shar80], we construct four data structures, called S t r u c t O f ,
            S tru c tT y p e , S t r u c t u r e s , and S tr u c tN o d e s as we analyze a flow graph (Figure
            7.38). S tr u c tO f gives, for each node, the (abstract) region node im m ediately con ­
            taining it. S tr u c tT y p e gives, for each region node, its type. S t r u c t u r e s is the set o f
            all region nodes. S tru c tN o d e s gives, for each region, the list o f nodes in it.
                 The structural analysis algorithm S t r u c t u r a l _ A n a l y s i s ( ) given in Figure
            7.39 assum es we are using the region types show n in Figures 7 .3 5 and 7 .3 6 , plus
            the others described above, although others can be used, as app rop riate to the lan­
            gu age^ ) being processed. The algorithm first initializes the d ata structures described
            above that record the hierarchical structure o f the flow graph and the structures that
            represent the control tree (CTNodes and CTEdges). Then it does a depth-first search
            o f the flow graph so as to construct a postorder traversal o f the flow graph’s nodes.
            Then, in a series o f passes over the flow graph, it identifies each region and collapses
            it to a single abstract region node. If a reduction is perform ed, it repairs the sets
            o f nodes and edges in the flow graph and (if necessary) the postorder traversal and
            processes the graph again. The algorithm replaces the edges entering a region with
            edges to the new ab stract node that replaces it and edges leaving the region with
            edges from the new node. In parallel, it constructs the control tree.
                 The set ReachUnder is used to determ ine the nodes contained in a cyclic control
            structure. If ReachUnder contains a single node and there is an edge from that node
            to itself, then the loop is a self loop. If it contains m ore than one node, it can be
            a while loop, a natural loop, or an im proper region. If the nodes in ReachUnder
            are all descendants o f the first node put into it, then the loop is a while or natural
            loop. If it contains a nondescendant o f the first node put into it, then the region is an
            im proper one. N ote that for an im proper region, the resulting region ’s entry node is
206               Control-Flow Analysis

                  procedure Structural.Analysis(N,E ,entry)
                     N: in set of Node
                     E: in set of (Node x Node)
                     entry: in Node
                  begin
                     m, n, p: Node
                     rtype: RegionType
                     NodeSet, ReachUnder: set of Node
                     StructOf := StructType := Structures := StructNodes :=
                     CTNodes      N; CTEdges := 0
                     repeat
                        Post := 0; Visit := 0
                        PostMax := 0; PostCtr := 1
                        DFS.Postorder(N,E ,entry)
                        while |N| > 1 & PostCtr < PostMax do
                            n := Post(PostCtr)
                            II locate an acyclic region, if present
                            rtype     Acyclic_Region_Type(N,E,n,NodeSet)
                            if rtype * nil then
                               p     Reduce(N,E,rtype,NodeSet)
                               if entry e NodeSet then
                                   entry := p
                               fi
                            else
                               II locate a cyclic region, if present
                               ReachUnder := {n}
                               for each m e N do
                                   if Path_Back(m,n) then
                                       ReachUnder u= {m}
                                   fi
                               od
                               rtype := Cyclic_Region_Type(N,E,n,ReachUnder)
                               if rtype * nil then
                                   p    Reduee(N,E,rtype,ReachUnder)
                                   if entry e ReachUnder then
                                       entry := p
                                   fi
                               else
                                   PostCtr += 1
                               fi
                            fi
                        od
                     until IN| = 1
                  end    II Structural.Analysis

  FIG . 7 . 3 9   The structural analysis algorithm.
            Section 7.7       Structural Analysis                                                                 207

            procedure DFS_Postorder(N,E,x)
                N: in set of Node
                E: in set of (Node x Node)
                x: in Node
            begin
                y : Node
                Visit(x) := true
                for each y e Succ(x) (Visit(y) * nil) do
                     DFS_Postorder(N,E ,y)
                od
                PostMax += 1
                Post(PostMax) := x
            end     II DFS_Postorder

FIG. 7.40   Computing a postorder traversal of the nodes in a flowgraph.

            not part o f the cyclic structure, since all regions have only a single entry; the routine
            M inim ize_Im proper( ) in Figure 7.45 determines the set o f nodes making up such
            a region.
                  The com putation of ReachUnder uses the function P a th _ B a c k (r a ,« ), which
            returns t r u e if there is a node k such that there is a (possibly empty) path from m
            to k that does not pass through n and an edge k^>n that is a back edge, and f a l s e
            otherwise.
                  The algorithm terminates when it has reduced the flowgraph to the trivial graph
            with a single node and no edges. The routine D F S _ P o sto rd e r( ) given in Fig­
            ure 7.40 constructs a postorder traversal o f the nodes in the flowgraph. The routine
            A cyclic_R egion _T ype ( N tE , node, nset) given in Figure 7.41 determines whether
            node is the entry node o f an acyclic control structure and returns either its type or
            n i l (if it is not such an entry node); the routine also stores in nset the set o f nodes
            in the identified control structure.
                  The routine C yclic_R egion _T y p e (N ,E , node, nset) given in Figure 7.42 deter­
            mines whether node is the entry node o f a cyclic control structure and either returns
            its type or n i l (if it is not such an entry node); it similarly stores in nset the set o f
            nodes in the identified control structure.
                  The routine R educe(N ,E ,rty p e , N o d e S e t), defined in Figure 7.43, calls
            C reate_N ode( ) to create a region node n to represent the identified region and
            sets the S tru ctT y p e , S t r u c t u r e s , S t r u c t O f, and S tru c tN o d e s data structures ac­
            cordingly. It returns n as its value. Reduce ( ) uses R e p la ce ( ), which is defined in
            Figure 7.44, to replace the identified region by the new node, to adjust the incoming
            and outgoing edges and the successor and predecessor functions correspondingly,
            and to build the control tree represented by CTNodes and CTEdges.
                  The routine Com pact(N ,n ,n se t) used in R e p la c e ( ) adds node n to N , inserts
            n into P o st ( ) in the highest-numbered position o f a node in nset, removes the nodes
            in nset from both N and P o st ( ), com pacts the remaining nodes at the beginning o f
            P o st ( ), sets P o stC tr to the index o f n in the resulting postorder, and sets PostMax
            accordingly; it returns the new value o f N .
                  The routine M in im iz e _ Im p ro p er(N ,E ,n ,n s e t ) given in Figure 7.45 is used to
            determine a small improper region containing n. Depending on the order of the
208               Control-Flow Analysis

                  procedure Acyclic_Region_Type(N,E,node,nset) returns RegionType
                     N: in set of Node
                     E: in set of (Node x Node)
                     node: inout Node
                     nset: out set of Node
                  begin
                     m, n: Node
                     p, s: boolean
                     nset := 0
                     II check for a Block containing node
                     n := node; p := true; s := |Succ(n)| = 1
                     while p & s do
                        nset u= {n}; n := ♦Succ(n); p = |Pred(n)l = 1; s := |Succ(n)l
                     od
                     if p then
                        nset u= {n}
                     fi
                     n := node; p := |Pred(n)| = 1; s := true
                     while p & s do
                        nset u= {n};       ♦Pred(n); p := |Pred(n)| = 1; s    ISucc(n)I
                     od
                     if s then
                        nset u= {n}
                     fi
                     node := n
                     if |nset| £ 2 then
                        return Block
                     I| check for an IfThenElse
                     elif |Succ(node)| = 2 then
                        m := ♦Succ(node); n := ♦(Succ(node) - {m})
                        if Succ(m) = Succ(n) & |Succ(m)| = 1
                            & |Pred(m)| = 1 & |Pred(n)| = 1 then
                            nset := {node,m,n}
                            return IfThenElse
                         II other cases (IfThen, Case, Proper)
                        elif . . .

                             else
                                return nil
                             fi
                        fi
                  end        II Acyclic_Region_Type

  F IG . 7.41     Routine to identify the type of an acyclic structure.

                  procedure Cyclic_Region_Type(N,E,node,nset) returns RegionType
                     N: in set of Node
                     E: in set of (Node x Node)
                     node: in Node
                     nset: inout set of Node

  F IG . 7 .4 2   Routine to identify the type of a cyclic structure.
             Section 7.7    Structural Analysis                       209

             begin
                m: Node
                 I| check for a SelfLoop
                if Inset| = 1 then
                    if node-^node e E then
                       return SelfLoop
                    else
                       return nil
                    fi
                fi
                 if 3m e nset (!Path(node,m,N)) then
                    II it’s an Improper region
                    nset := Minimize_Improper(N,E,node,nset)
                    return Improper
                fi
                 I| check for a WhileLoop
                m := ♦(nset - {node})
                 if |Succ(node)| = 2 & |Succ(m)| = 1 &
                    |Pred(node)| = 2 & |Pred(m)| = 1 then
                    return WhileLoop
                 else
                    II it’s a NaturalLoop
                    return NaturalLoop
                 fi
             end    II CyclicEntryType

FIG. 7.42    (continued)

             procedure Reduce(N,E,rtype,NodeSet) returns Node
                N: inout set of Node
                E: inout set of (Node x Node)
                rtype: in RegionType
                NodeSet: in set of Node
             begin
                node := Create_Node( ), m: Node
                 II replace node set by an abstract region node and
                 I| set data structures
                Replace(N,E ,node,NodeSet)
                StructType(node) := rtype
                Structures u= {node}
                for each m e NodeSet do
                    StructOf(m) := node
                 od
                StructNodes(node) := NodeSet
                return node
             end    II Reduce

FIG . 7.43   Region-reduction routine for structural analysis.
210               Control-Flow Analysis

                  procedure Replace(N,E ,node,NodeSet)
                     N: inout set of Node
                      E: inout set of (Node x Node)
                     node: in Node
                      NodeSet: in set of Node
                  begin
                     II link region node into abstract flowgraph, adjust the postorder traversal
                      II and predecessor and successor functions, and augment the control tree
                     m, ctnode :® Create_Node( ): Node
                      e: Node x Node
                      N := Compact(N,node,NodeSet)
                      for each e e E do
                         if e@l e NodeSet V e@2 e NodeSet then
                            E -= {e}; Succ(e@l) -= {e@2}; Pred(e@2) -= {e@l}
                            if e@l e N & e@l * node then
                               E u= {e@l-*node}; Succ(e@l) u= {node}
                            elif e@2 e N & e@2 * node then
                               E u= {node-*e@2}; Pred(e@2) u« {node}
                            fi
                         fi
                      od
                      CTNodes u= {ctnode}
                      for each n e NodeSet do
                         CTEdges u= {ctnode-^n}
                      od
                  end    || Replace

  F IG . 7 .4 4   Routine to do node and edge replacement and control-tree building for structural
                  analysis.


                  procedure Minimize_Improper(N,E,node,nset) returns set of Node
                     N, nset: in set of Node
                     E: in set of (Node x Node)
                     node: in Node
                  begin
                     ncd, m, n: Node
                     I := MEC.Entries(node,nset,E): set of Node
                     ncd := NC_Domin(I,N,E)
                     for each n € N - {ncd} do
                        if Path(ncd,n,N) & 3m e I (Path(n,m,N-{ncd})) then
                              I u= { n}
                         fi
                      od
                      return I u {ncd}
                  end    II Minimize.Improper

  F IG . 7 .4 5   Im proper-interval minimization routine for structural analysis.
            Section 7.7    Structural Analysis                                                       211


                                                                                    entryb


                                                                                      B3


                                                                               B4              B5b




                                                                                      (C)




                                                                                    en try c

                                                                                      (e)


                                                     (d )
FIG. 7.46 Structural analysis of a flowgraph.

            nodes in the flowgraph given by D FS.Postorder ( ), it limits the improper region
            either to the smallest subgraph containing n and at least two other nodes such that
            ( 1 ) one of the nodes other than n dominates all the nodes in the subgraph and (2 )
            any node on a non-empty path from n to some other node in the subgraph is also
            in the subgraph, or to a somewhat larger improper region that contains the smallest
            one as a subgraph.
                  Minimize_Improper( ) uses two functions, namely, MEC_Entries(rc,«se£,E),
            which returns the set of entry nodes (all members of nset) of the smallest multiple-
            entry cycle of which n is one of the entries, and NC_Domin(7,N,E), which returns
            the nearest common dominator of the nodes in I. NC_Domin( ) can easily be com­
            puted from the flowgraph’s dominator tree. The function Path(«, m, I) returns true
            if there is a path from n to m such that all the nodes in it are in I and false otherwise.
                   See the discussion of Figure 7.49(b) below for an example of how the postorder
            affects determination of the resulting improper region. This approach almost always
            results in smaller improper intervals than Sharir’s original method.
                   As an example of structural analysis, consider the flowgraph in Figure 7.46(a).
            Figure 7.47 shows a depth-first spanning tree for the flowgraph. The first stage of
212           Control-Flow Analysis

                       entry

                         j

              F         B2     . B


                   N^ B 3

                  B4           B5


                               B6    F

                               i ,
  FIG. 7.47 Depth-first spanning tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.46(a).

              the analysis,6 shown in Figure 7.46(b), does three reductions: entry followed by B1
              is recognized as a block and reduced accordingly, B2 is recognized as a self loop and
              reduced, and B5 and B6 are recognized as an if-then and reduced. It sets the data
              structures as follows:

                       StructType(entrya) = Block
                       StructOf(entry) = StructOf(Bl) = entrya
                       StructNodes(entrya) = {entry,Bl>
                       StructType(B2a) = SelfLoop
                       StructOf(B2) = B2a
                       StructNodes(B2a) = {B2}
                       StructType(B5a) = IfThen
                       StructOf(B5) = StructOf(B6) = B5a
                       StructNodes(B5a) = {B5,B6}
                       Structures = {entrya,B2a,B5a}

              The next stage, shown in Figure 7.46(c), recognizes and reduces the if-then made up
              of entrya and B2a and the block made up of B5a and B7. It sets the data structures
              as follows:

                       StructType(entryb) = IfThen
                       StructOf(entrya) = StructOf(B2a) = entryb
                       StructNodes(entryb) = {entrya,B2a>
                       StructType(B5b) = Block
                       StructOf(B5a) = StructOf(B7) = B5b
                       StructNodes(B5b) = {B5a,B7}
                       Structures = {entrya,B2a,B5a,entryb,B5b}


              6. The figure actually shows what can be thought of as a parallel version of structural analysis that
              may make several reductions in each pass. This is done in the figure to save space, but could be
              implemented in the algorithm at the expense of significantly decreasing its understandability.
            Section 7.7   Structural Analysis                                                213


                              entryc




                                         B5     B6

FIG. 7.48 Control tree for the flowgraph analyzed in Figure 7.46.




FIG. 7.49 Two examples of improper intervals.

           In the next stage, shown in Figure 7.46(d), B3, B4, and B5b are reduced as an if-then-
           else, and the data structures are set as follows:
                StructType(B3a) = IfThenElse
                Struct0f(B3) = Struct0f(B4) = StructOf(B5b) = B3a
                StructNodes(B3a) = {B3,B4,B5b>
                Structures = {entrya,B2a,B5a,entryb,B5b,B3a}

            In the final stage, en try b , B3a, and e x i t are reduced as a block, resulting in
            Figure 7.46(e). The data structures are set as follows:
                StructType(entryc) = Block
                StructOf(entryb) = StructOf(B3a) = StructOf(exit) = entryc
                StructNodes(entryc) = {entryb,B3a,exit}
                Structures = {entrya,B2a,B5a,entryb,B5b,B3a,entryc}

           The resulting control tree is given in Figure 7.48.
               Figure 7.49 gives two examples of flowgraphs that contain improper regions. In
           example (a) the routine M inim ize_Im proper( ) recognizes the subgraph consisting
Control-Flow Analysis


of all nodes except B6 as the improper interval. In (b) the improper interval(s)
recognized depend on the particular postorder traversal used: if B3 precedes B2,
then it recognizes an improper region consisting of Bl, B3, and B4 and then another
consisting of the abstract node for that region along with B2 and B5; if B2 precedes
B3, then it recognizes a single improper region consisting of all five nodes.


Wrap-Up
Control-flow analysis is our first foray into material that relates directly to opti­
mization.
     Optimization requires that we be able to characterize the control flow of pro­
grams and the manipulations they perform on their data, so that any unused gener­
ality can be removed and operations can be replaced by faster ones.
     As discussed above, there are two main approaches to control-flow analysis,
both of which start by determining the basic blocks that make up the routine and
constructing its flowgraph. The first approach uses dominators to discover loops
and simply notes the loops it finds for use in optimization. We also identify extended
basic blocks and reverse extended basic blocks for those optimizations that can be
applied to them. This is sufficient for use by iterative data-flow analyzers.
     The second approach, called interval analysis, includes a series of methods that
analyze the overall structure of the routine and that decompose it into nested re­
gions called intervals. The nesting structure of the intervals forms the control tree,
which is useful in structuring and speeding up data-flow analysis. The most sophis­
ticated form of interval analysis, called structural analysis, classifies essentially all
the control-flow structures in a routine. It is sufficiently important that we devoted
a separate section to it.
     In the past, most optimizing compilers used dominators and iterative data-flow
analysis, but this is changing because the interval-based approaches are faster, they
make it easier to update already computed data-flow information, and structural
analysis makes it particularly easy to perform the control-flow transformations dis­
cussed in Chapter 18.


Further Reading
Lengauer and Tarjan’s approach to computing dominators is described in [LenT79].
It uses path-compression methods that are described more fully in [Tarj81]. Tar­
jan’s algorithm for finding strongly connected components is described in [Tarj72].
Alstrup and Lauridsen’s dominator-tree update algorithm is described in [AlsL96].
     An overview of the flowgraph transformations that are responsible for the no­
tion of flowgraph reducibility’s being called that can be found in [Kenn81]. The
studies of reducibility in Fortran programs are from Allen and Cocke [AllC72b]; and
Knuth [Knut71]. T1-T2 analysis is described in [Ullm73]. The definition of maximal
interval is from Allen and Cocke [A11C76]; Aho, Sethi, and Ullman [AhoS8 6 ] also
use maximal intervals. Both give algorithms for partitioning a reducible flowgraph
into maximal intervals.
             Section 7.10     Exercises                                                             215


                  Structural analysis was originally formulated by Sharir [Shar80]. The syntax-
             tree-based method of data-flow analysis is due to Rosen (see [Rose77] and [Rose79])
             and was extended by Schwartz and Sharir [SchS79]. The modern approach to ana­
             lyzing and minimizing improper intervals is discussed in [JaiT 8 8 ], but the approach,
             as described there, is flawed—its intentional definition of the improper region dom­
             inated by a given node results in its containing just that node.


7.10         Exercises
        7.1 Specify the set of flowgraph edges that must be added to a C function because it
            includes a call to setjm p( ).
        7.2 (a) Divide the ican procedure Domin_Fast( ) in Figure 7.16 into basic blocks. You
            might find it useful to construct a flowgraph of it. (b) Then divide it into extended
            basic blocks.
        7.3 Construct (a) a depth-first presentation, (b) depth-first ordering, (c) preorder, and
            (d) postorder of the flowchart nodes for the routine D epth_First_Search_PP( ) in
            Figure 7.12.
        7.4 Suppose that for each pair of nodes a and b in a flowgraph a dom b if and only if
            b pdom a. What is the structure of the flowgraph?
        7.5 Implement Dom_Comp( ), Idom_Comp( ), and Domin_Fast ( ) in a language available
            to you and run them on the flowgraph in Figure 7.32.
        7.6 Explain what the procedure Compress ( ) in Figure 7.17 does.
        7.7 Explain what the procedure Link( ) in Figure 7.18 does.
        7.8 Apply the algorithm Strong_Components( ) in Figure 7.26 to the graph in Fig­
            ure 7.50.
        7.9 Define an infinite sequence of distinct improper regions Ri, R 2 , R 35 • • • > with each
            Ri consisting of a set of nodes N, and a set of edges £/.
       7.10 Give an infinite sequence of irreducible regions R i, R 2 , R 3 , . . . such that Rz consists
            of i nodes and such that performing node splitting on Rz results in a flowgraph whose
            number of nodes is exponential in /.
       7.11 Write an ican program to compute the maximal intervals in a reducible flowgraph.
       7.12 Write an ican program to compute the minimal intervals in a reducible flowgraph.
RSCH 7.13 Read Rosen’s articles ([Rose77] and [Rose79]) and show the formulas he would
          construct for an if-then-else construct and a repeat loop.
       7.14 Write a formal specification of the case/switch schema in Figure 7.35 as a set of
            graphs.
       7.15 Write a formal specification of the set of natural loops (see Figure 7.36), where a
            natural loop is defined to be a single-entry, multiple-exit loop, with only a single
            branch back to the entry from within it.
216          Control-Flow Analysis




  FIG. 7.50 An example graph to which to apply the algorithm Strong_Components( ) in
            Figure 7.26.


       7.16 Perform structural control-flow analyses of the routines (a) Make_Webs( ) in Fig­
            ure 16.7 and (b) Gen_Spill_Code( ) in Figure 16.24.
  ADV 7.17 Implement in ican the function MEC_Entries( ) used by Minimize.Improper ( ).
                                                                   CHAPTER 8




                        Data-Flow Analysis




T
          he purpose of data-flow analysis is to provide global information about
          how a procedure (or a larger segment of a program) manipulates its data.
          For example, constant-propagation analysis seeks to determine whether all
          assignments to a particular variable that may provide the value of that variable at
some particular point necessarily give it the same constant value. If so, a use of the
variable at that point can be replaced by the constant.
     The spectrum of possible data-flow analyses ranges from abstract execution of
a procedure, which might determine, for example, that it computes the factorial
function (as discussed in Section 8.14), to much simpler and easier analyses such as
the reaching definitions problem discussed in the next section.
     In all cases, we must be certain that a data-flow analysis gives us information
that does not misrepresent what the procedure being analyzed does, in the sense
that it must not tell us that a transformation of the code is safe to perform that, in
fact, is not safe. We must guarantee this by careful design of the data-flow equations
and by being sure that the solution to them that we compute is, if not an exact
representation of the procedure’s manipulation of its data, at least a conservative
approximation of it. For example, for the reaching definitions problem, where we
determine what definitions of variables may reach a particular use, the analysis must
not tell us that no definitions reach a particular use if there are some that may. The
analysis is conservative if it may give us a larger set of reaching definitions than it
might if it could produce the minimal result.
     However, to obtain the maximum possible benefit from optimization, we seek
to pose data-flow problems that are both conservative and, at the same time, as
aggressive as we can make them. Thus, we shall always attempt to walk the fine line
between being as aggressive as possible in the information we compute and being
conservative, so as to get the greatest possible benefit from the analyses and code­
improvement transformations we perform without ever transforming correct code
to incorrect code.

                                                                                217
218   Data-Flow Analysis


          Finally, as you will recall, in Section 7.1 we discussed three approaches to
      control- and data-flow analysis and our reasons for presenting all three of them in
      the text. It is worth referring to that section to refresh your memory as to why we
      choose to present all three.


8.1   An Example: Reaching Definitions
      As an introduction to data-flow analysis, we continue the informal example we
      began at the beginning of Chapter 7 by performing a simple data-flow analysis
      called reaching definitions on the procedure given there that computed Fibonacci
      numbers. Our starting point consists of the flowchart in Figure 7.3 and the flowgraph
      in Figure 7.4.
           A definition is an assignment of some value to a variable. A particular definition
      of a variable is said to reach a given point in a procedure if there is an execution
      path from the definition to that point such that the variable may have, at that
      point, the value assigned by the definition. Our goal is to determine which particular
      definitions of (i.e., assignments to) each variable may, by some control-flow path,
      reach any particular point in the procedure. We take the term control-flow path
      to mean any directed path in the flowchart for a procedure, usually irrespective of
      whether predicates controlling branching along the path are satisfied or not.
           We could perform data-flow analysis on the flowchart of a procedure, but it
      is more efficient in general to divide it up into local flow analysis, done within
      each basic block, and global flow analysis, done on the flowgraph. To do so, we
      summarize the effect of each basic block to produce the local information and then
      use it in the global analysis, producing information that corresponds to the entry
      and exit of each basic block. The resulting global information can then be combined
      with the local information to produce the set of definitions that reach the beginning
      of each intermediate-language construct within any basic block. This has the effect
      of reducing the number of steps needed to compute the data-flow information, often
      significantly, in return for the generally small expense of propagating the information
      from the beginning (or end) of a block to a point within it when it is needed there.
           Similarly, most of the data-flow analyses we consider concern sets of various
      kinds of program objects (constants, variables, definitions, expressions, etc.) and
      the determination of what set of such objects is valid at any particular point in a
      procedure. What kind of objects and what is meant by valid depend on the particular
      problem. In the next few paragraphs, we formulate the reaching definitions problem
      in two ways, as a problem over sets and as a problem over bit vectors, which are
      simply a convenient representation for sets for use in a computer, since set union,
      intersection, and complement correspond directly to bitwise or, and, and not on bit
      vectors.
           Reaching definitions analysis can be done in the classic form known as an
      iterative forward bit-vector problem— “ iterative” because we construct a collection
      of data-flow equations to represent the information flow and solve it by iteration
      from an appropriate set of initial values; “ forward” because the information flow is
      in the direction of execution along the control-flow edges in the program; and “ bit-
          Section 8.1    An Example: Reaching Definitions                                    219


          1    int g(int m, int i)

          2    int f (n)
          3        int n;
                          o
          4    {   int i  ii    ■i-)
          5        if (n — 1) i =
          6        while (n > 0) {
          7              J « i + 1;
          8              n = g(n,i) ;
          9        >
          10       return j;
          11    >

FIG. 8.1 Example of undecidability of reaching definitions and dependence on input values.

          vector” because we can represent each definition by a 1 (meaning it may reach the
          given point) or a 0 (meaning it does not) and, hence, the collection of all definitions
          that may reach a point by a sequence or vector of bits.
               In general, as for most of the data-flow analysis problems we deal with, it is
          recursively undecidable whether a definition actually reaches some other point. Also,
          whether a definition reaches a particular point may depend on the input data. For
          example, in the C code in Figure 8.1, whether the definition of i in the declaration in
          line 4 actually reaches the uses in lines 7 and 8 depends on the value of the parameter
          n of function f ( ), and whether the definition of j in line 7 actually reaches the
          use in the retu rn in line 10 depends on whether the while loop terminates, which
          is, in general, recursively undecidable. Thus, we distinguish between what we can
          determine to be false on the one hand and what we either know to be true or cannot
          determine on the other. Since optimizations based on reaching definitions depend on
          what may be true, we keep to the side of conservatism, putting the preservation of
          correctness of the program ahead of aggressiveness of optimization.
               Table 8.1 gives the correspondence between bit positions and definitions in the
          flowchart in Figure 7.3. Thus, a vector of eight bits can be used to represent which
          definitions reach the beginning of each basic block in the program.
               Clearly, the appropriate initial condition is that none of the definitions reaches
          the entry node, so the set of definitions valid on entry to the en try block is

               RCHin (entry) = 0

          or as an eight-bit vector,

               RCHin(e ntry) = (00000000)

          Further, since we are trying to determine which definitions may reach a particular
          point, it is a conservative (but unnecessary) assumption to initialize

               RCHin(i) = 0    for all i
          or
               RCHin{i) = (00000000)       for all i
220          Data-Flow Analysis


 TABLE 8.1   Correspondence between bit-vector positions, definitions,
             and basic blocks for the flowchart in Figure 7.3.

             Bit Position             Definition                  Basic Block

             1                        m in node 1                 Bl
             2                        f 0 in node 2
             3                        f 1 in node 3

             4                        i in node 5                 B3

             5                        f 2 in node 8               B6
             6                        f 0 in node 9
             7                        f 1 in node 10
             8                        i in node 11




             Now we must figure out what effect each node in the flowgraph has on each bit in
             the bit vectors. If a mir instruction redefines the variable represented by the given bit
             position, then it is said to kill the definition; otherwise it preserves it. This suggests
             that we define sets (and corresponding bit vectors) called PRSV(i) that represent the
             definitions preserved by block /. It is easy to see that, as sets (using the bit positions
             to represent the definitions),

                  PRSV( B l ) = {4 ,5 ,8 }
                  PRSV( B 3 )= { 1 ,2 ,3 ,5 ,6 ,7 }
                  PRSV( B 6 )= {1}
                  PRSV(i)      = { 1 ,2 ,3 ,4 ,5 ,6 ,7 ,8 }   for i ^ B 1 ,B 3 ,B 6

             and, as bit vectors (counting from the left end),

                  PRSV( B l ) = (00011001)
                  PRSV( B 3 )= (11101110)
                  PRSV( B 6 )= (10000000)
                  PRSV(i)      = (11111111)           for i ^ Bl, B3, B6

             For example, the 0 in bit position seven of PRSV(Bl) indicates that basic block Bl
             kills the definition of f 1 in node 10,1 while the 1 in bit position 5 of PRSV(Bl)
             indicates that Bl does not kill the definition of f 2 in node 8. Some texts, such as
             [AhoS86], use K I L L ()—the negation of P R S V ()—instead of P R SV ().


             1. In fact, since there is no way for control to flow from the basic block containing node 10, namely,
             block B6, to block Bl, we need not make this bit a 0, but it certainly does not hurt to do so.
Section 8.1       An Example: Reaching Definitions                                                   221

     Correspondingly, we define sets and bit vectors GEN (i) that give the definitions
generated by block /,2 i.e., that are assigned values in the block and not subsequently
killed in it. As sets, the G E N () values are
     GEN(Bl) = {1,2, 3}
     GEN(B3) = {4}
     GEN(B6) = {5, 6, 7,8}
     GEN(i)       =0     for      Bl, B3, B6
and as bit vectors they are
     GEN(Bl) = (11100000)
     GEN( B3) = (00010000)
     GEN(B6) = (00001111)
     GEN(i)       = (00000000)         for i ^ Bl, B3, B6
     Finally, we define sets and corresponding bit vectors RCHout(i) that represent
the definitions that reach the end of basic block i. As for RCHin(i), it is sufficient to
initialize RCHout(i) by3

     RCHout(i) = 0
or
     RCHout(i) = (00000000)              for all i
     Now a definition may reach the end of basic block i if and only if either it
occurs in block i and the variable it defines is not redefined in i or it may reach the
beginning of i and is preserved by /; or symbolically, using sets and set operations,
this is represented by

     RCHout(i) = GEN(i) U (RCHin(i) C\PRSV(i))                      f o r a ll i

or, using bitwise logical operations on bit vectors, by
     RCHout(i) = GEN(i) v (RCHin(i) A PRSV(i))                      f o r a ll i

A definition may reach the beginning of block i if it may reach the end of some
predecessor of /, i.e., for sets,

     RCHin(i) =        |^J      RCHout(j)      for all i
                    jePred(i)


2. We ignore, for the moment, the fact that some definitions of a variable are unambiguous, such
as explicit assignments, while others, such as assignments through pointers and procedure calls, are
ambiguous in the sense that they may or may not affect a particular variable, and we may not be
able to determine whether they do. No ambiguous definitions occur in this procedure.
3. As we shall see, this is actually unnecessary: since each R C H ou t(i) is computed from the
R C H in (i ), GEN(/‘), and P R SV (i) for the same block, we really need not initialize the R C H ou t( )
values at all.
222   Data-Flow Analysis

      or, for bit vectors,

          R C H in (i)=       \J       R C H o u t ( j)   for all /
                           jePred(i)

          To solve the system of (bit-vector) equations for R C H in (i) and R C H o u t ( i ), we
      simply initialize the R C H in (i) to the values given above and iterate application of
      the equations until no further changes result. To understand why iteration produces
      an acceptable solution to the system of equations, we require a general introduction
      to lattices and fixed-point iteration, which is given in the next section. After one
      application of the equations, we have
          R C H o u t ( e n try )   = (00000000)               R C H in (e n try)        = (00000000)
          R C H o u t ( Bl)         = (11100000)               R C H in ( Bl)        = (00000000)
          R C H o u t ( B2)         = (11100000)               R C H in ( B2)        = (11100000)
          R C H o u t ( B3)         = (11110000)               R C H in ( B3)        = (11100000)
          R C H o u t ( B4)         = (11110000)               R C H in ( B4)        -     (11110000)
          R C H o u t ( B5)         = (11110000)               R C H in ( B5)        = (11110000)
          R C H o u t ( B6)         = (10001111)               R C H in ( B6)        = (11110000)
          R C H o u t(e x i t )     = (11110000)               R C H in (e x i t )   = (11110000)
      After iterating one more time, we have
          R C H out (e n try )      = (00000000)               R C H in (e n try)    = (00000000)
          R C H o u t ( Bl)         = (11100000)               R C H in (B l)        = (00000000)
          R C H o u t ( B2)         = (11100000)               R C H in ( B2)        = (11100000)
          R C H o u t ( B3)         = (11110000)               R C H in ( B3)        -     (11100000)
          R C H o u t ( B4)         = (11111111)               R C H in ( B4)        = (11111111)
          R C H o u t ( B5)         = (11111111)               R C H in ( B5)        = (11111111)
          R C H o u t ( B6)         = (10001111)               R C H in (B6)         = (11111111)
          R C H ou t(exit)          = (11111111)               R C H in (e x i t )   = (11111111)
      and iterating one more time produces no more changes, so the above values are the
      solution.
           Note that the rules for performing the iteration never change a 1 to a 0, i.e.,
      they are monotone, so we are guaranteed that the iteration process ultimately does
      terminate.
           The solution to the data-flow equations gives us a global view of which defini­
      tions of variables may reach which uses. For example, it shows that the definition
      of f 0 in basic block B1 may reach the first use of f 0 in block B6 and that along the
      execution path through basic block B2, the variables i and f 2 are never defined. One
      way we might use this information to optimize the program is to avoid allocation of
      storage (and registers) for i and f 2 along the path through B2.
           Note that, while it may be easier to understand the data-flow equations as
      presented above, there is actually no theoretical reason to have both R C H in ( ) and
     Section 8.2     Basic Concepts: Lattices, Flow Functions, and Fixed Points              223

     RCHout( ) functions. Instead, we can substitute the equations for RCHout( ) into
     the equations for R C H in() to get the simpler system of equations

          RCHin(i) =        |^J       (G E N (j) U (RCHin(j) fl PR SV (j)))   for all i
                         jePred(i)

     or

          R C H in(i)=                (G E N (j) v (RCHin(j) a PR SV (j)))    for all i
                         jeP red(i)

     with exactly the same solution. However, there is a practical trade-off involved in
     choosing to use both RCHin( ) and RCHout( ) functions or only one of them. If
     we employ both, we double the space required to represent the data-flow informa­
     tion, but we reduce the amount of computation required; with only the RCHin( )
     functions saved, we need to compute

          G E N (j) U (RCHin(j) D PRSV (j))

     repeatedly, even if RCHin(j) has not changed, while if we use both functions, we
     have its value available immediately.


     Basic Concepts: Lattices, Flow Functions, and
     Fixed Points
     We now proceed to define the conceptual framework underlying data-flow analy­
     sis. In each case, a data-flow analysis is performed by operating on elements of an
     algebraic structure called a lattice. Elements of the lattice represent abstract prop­
     erties of variables, expressions, or other programming constructs for all possible
     executions of a procedure—independent of the values of the input data and, usually,
     independent of the control-flow paths through the procedure. In particular, most
     data-flow analyses take no account of whether a conditional is true or false and,
     thus, of whether the then or e ls e branch of an i f is taken, or of how many times a
     loop is executed. We associate with each of the possible control-flow and computa­
     tional constructs in a procedure a so-called flow function that abstracts the effect of
     the construct to its effect on the corresponding lattice elements.
          In general, a lattice L consists of a set of values and two operations called meet,
     denoted n, and join, denoted u, that satisfy several properties, as follows:
1.   For all x, y e L, there exist unique z and w € L such that x n y = z and x u y = w
     (closure).
2.   For all x, y e L, x n y = y n x and x u y = y u x (commutativity).
3.   For all x, y, z e L, (x n y) n z = x n (y n z) and (x u y) u z = x u (y u z) (associativity).
4.   There are two unique elements of L called bottom, denoted ± , and top, denoted T,
     such that for all x e L, x n _L = _!_ and x u T = T (existence of unique top and bottom
     elements).
224              Data-Flow Analysis


                                <1U>



                 <110)          <101)      <011 )


                 <   100)       <   010)   <   001)



                                <   000>
      FIG. 8.2 BY3, the lattice of three-element bit vectors.

                     Many lattices, including all the ones we use except the one for constant propa­
                 gation (see Section 12.6), are also distributive, i.e., for all x , y , z e L,
                            (x n y) u z = (x u z) n (y u z) and (x u y) n z = (x n z) u (yn z)
                      Most of the lattices we use have bit vectors as their elements and meet and join
                 are bitwise and and or, respectively. The bottom element of such a lattice is the
                 bit vector of all zeros and top is the vector of all ones. We use BV” to denote the
                 lattice of bit vectors of length n. For example, the eight-bit vectors in our example
                 in Section 8.1 form a lattice with ± = (00000000) and T = (11111111). The join
                 of two bit vectors is the bit vector that has a one wherever either of them has a one
                 and a zero otherwise. For example,
                            (00101111) u (01100001) = (01101111)
                 A lattice similar to the one in the reaching definitions example, but with vectors of
                 only three bits, is shown in Figure 8.2.
                      There are several ways to construct lattices by combining simpler ones. The first
                 of these methods is the product operation, which combines lattices elementwise. The
                 product of two lattices Li and L 2 with meet operators rii and 112, respectively, which
                 is written Li x L 2 , is {{x \,x i) I x\ e L \ ,x i e L 2 }, with the meet operation defined
                 by

                            (*i,*2> n (yi,y2> = (*1 r>i y i,x 2 n2 y2>
                 The join operator is defined analogously. The product operation generalizes in the
                 natural way to more than two lattices and, in particular, what we have already
                 referred to as BV” is just the product of n copies of the trivial lattice BV = BV1 =
                 {0,1} with bottom 0 and top 1.
                      In some cases, bit vectors are undesirable or insufficient to represent the needed
                 information. A simple example for which they are undesirable is for constant prop­
                 agation of integer values, for which we use a lattice based on the one called ICP
                 shown in Figure 8.3. Its elements are ± , T , all the integers, and the Booleans, and it
                 is defined by the following properties:
            1.   For all n e ICP, n n _L= _L.
            2.   For all n e ICP, n u T = T.
           Section 8.2        Basic Concepts: Lattices, Flow Functions, and Fixed Points      225
                                      T




           false ...     -2     -1    0      1   2    ••• true


                                      j.

FIG. 8.3 Integer constant-propagation lattice ICP.


      3.   For all n e ICP, n r\n = n\J n = n.
      4.   For all integers and Booleans ra, n e ICP, if m ^ n , then m n n = ± and m u n = T.

           In Figure 8.3, the meet of any two elements is found by following the lines downward
           from them until they meet, and the join is found by following the lines upward until
           they join.
                Bit vectors could be used for constant propagation, as follows. Define Var to
           be the set of variable names of interest, and let Z denote the set of integers. The
           set of functions from finite subsets of Var to Z includes a representative for each
           possible assignment of constant values to the variables used in any program. Each
           such function can be represented as an infinite bit vector consisting of a position
           for each (v, c) pair for some v e Var and constant c e Z, where the position
           contains a 1 if v has value c and a 0 otherwise. The set of such infinite bit vectors
           forms a lattice under the usual lattice ordering on bit vectors. Clearly this lattice is
           much more complex than ICP: its elements are infinite bit vectors, and not only is it
           infinitely wide, like ICP, but it is also infinitely high, which makes this formulation
           very undesirable.
                Some data-flow analysis problems require very much more complex lattices than
           bit vectors, such as the two used by Jones and Muchnick [JonM81a] to describe
           the “ shapes” of Lisp-like data structures, one of which consists of elements that are
           regular tree grammars and the other of which consists of complex graphs.
                It should be clear from the graphic presentation of the lattices that the meet and
           join operations induce a partial order on the values, which is written o . It can be
           defined in terms of the meet operation as

               x O y if and only if x n y = x

           or it can be defined dually in terms of the join operation. The related operations
           □ , □, and 3 are defined correspondingly. The following properties of o (and corre­
           sponding ones for the other ordering relations) are easily derived from the definitions
           of meet and join:

      1.   For all x , y, z, if x C y and y o z, then x C z (transitivity).
      2.   For all x, y, if x O y and y C x , then x = y (antisymmetry).
      3.   For all x ,x O x (reflexivity).
226   Data-Flow Analysis


          A function mapping a lattice to itself, written as f: L -> L, is monotone if for all
      x, y x O y => f(x ) c f(y). For example, the function f: BV3 -» BV3 as defined by

          f((x ix 2x 3) ) = (x ilx 3)
      is monotone, while the function g: BV3 -> BV3 as defined by g((000)) = (100) and
      g ((*i*2 *3 > ) = (000) otherwise is not.
            The height of a lattice is the length of the longest strictly ascending chain in it,
      i.e., the maximal n such that there exist       x ~,l . . . , x n such that

          _L = x\ C X2 C . . . □ x n = T
      For example, the heights of the lattices in Figures 8.2 and 8.3 are 4 and 3, respec­
      tively. As for other lattice-related concepts, height may be dually defined by descend­
      ing chains. Almost all the lattices we use have finite height, and this, combined with
      monotonicity, guarantees termination of our data-flow analysis algorithms. For lat­
      tices of infinite height, it is essential to show that the analysis algorithms halt.
           In considering the computational complexity of a data-flow algorithm, another
      notion is important, namely, effective height relative to one or more functions. The
      effective height of a lattice L relative to a function f: L -> L is the length of the longest
      strictly ascending chain obtained by iterating application of f ( ), i.e., the maximal n
      such that there exist x i, X2 = f(x 1), X3 = f (x 2),         = f{ x n- \) such that

          X\   C X2 □ X3 □ . . . □ x n c T
      The effective height of a lattice relative to a set of functions is the maximum of its
      effective heights for each function.
           A flow function models, for a particular data-flow analysis problem, the effect of
      a programming language construct as a mapping from the lattice used in the analysis
      to itself. For example, the flow function for block B1 in the reaching definitions
      analysis in Section 8.1 is the function       BV8 -> BV8 given by

          FBl((*l* 2 * 3 * 4 * 5 * 6 * 7 * 8 » = (11 l x 4X500x8)
      We require that all flow functions be monotone. This is reasonable in that the pur­
      pose of a flow function is to model the information about a data-flow problem
      provided by a programming construct and, hence, it should not decrease the infor­
      mation already obtained. Monotonicity is also essential to demonstrating that each
      analysis we consider halts and to providing computational complexity bounds for it.
            The programming construct modeled by a particular flow function may vary,
      according to our requirements, from a single expression to an entire procedure.
      Thus, the function that transforms each RCHin(i) to RCHout(i) in the example in
      Section 8.1 may be viewed as a flow function, as may the function that transforms
      the entire set of RCHin(i)s to RCHout{i)s.
            A fixed point of a function f: L -> L is an element z € L such that f(z) = z. For
      a set of data-flow equations, a fixed point is a solution of the set of equations, since
      applying the right-hand sides of the equations to the fixed point produces the same
      value. In many cases, a function defined on a lattice may have more than one fixed
      point. The simplest example of this is the function f: BV -> BV with f ( 0) = 0 and
      f ( 1) = 1. Clearly, both 0 and 1 are fixed points of this function.
Section 8.2      Basic Concepts: Lattices, Flow Functions, and Fixed Points            227

     The value that we wish to compute in solving data-flow equations is the so-
called meet-over-all-patbs (MOP) solution. Intuitively, this results from beginning
with some prescribed information Init at the entry node of a flowgraph (or the exit
node for backward flow problems), applying the composition of the appropriate
flow functions along all possible paths from the entry (or exit) node to each node
in the flowgraph, and forming, for each node, the meet of the results. Expressed in
equations, we have the following for a forward flow problem. Let G = (N, E) be a
flowgraph. Let Path(B) represent the set of all paths from en try to any node B e N
and let p be any element of Path(B). Let FB( ) be the flow function representing
flow through block B and Fp( ) represent the composition of the flow functions
encountered in following the path p, i.e., if B \ = e n t r y ,. . . , Bn = B are the blocks
making up a particular path p to £ , then

    Fp = FBn o • • • o F b \

Let Init be the lattice value associated with the en try block. Then the meet-over-all-
paths solution is

    MOP(B) =         | |       Fp(Init) for B = entry, Bl,..., Bn, exit
                  pePath(B)


Analogous equations express the meet-over-all-paths solution for a backward flow
problem.
     Unfortunately, it is not difficult to show that for an arbitrary data-flow analysis
problem in which the flow functions are only guaranteed to be monotone, there
may be no algorithm that computes the meet-over-all-paths solution for all possible
flowgraphs. What our algorithms do compute is called the maximum fixed point
(MFP) solution, which is simply the solution to the data-flow equations that is
maximal in the ordering of the underlying lattice, i.e., the solution that provides
the most information. Kildall [Kild73] showed that for data-flow problems in which
all the flow functions are distributive, the general iterative algorithm that we give in
Section 8.4 computes the MFP solution and that, in that case, the MFP and MOP
solutions are identical. Kam and Ullman [KamU75] generalized this result to show
that for data-flow problems in which the flow functions are all monotone but not
necessarily distributive, the iterative algorithm produces the MFP solution (but not
necessarily the MOP solution).
     Before moving on to discuss the types of data-flow problems that are of interest
to us and how to solve them, we take a moment to discuss the issue of associating
data-flow information with the entry points of basic blocks in the flowgraph, rather
than with edges. The former is standard practice in most of the literature and all the
compilers we are aware of. However, a few papers associate data-flow information
with edges in the flowgraph. This has the effect of producing better information in
some cases, essentially because it does not force information at a node with multiple
predecessors (or, for backward flow problems, a node with multiple successors) to
be merged before it enters the node.
     A simple example of a situation in which this produces improved information is
the constant-propagation instance shown in Figure 8.4. Clearly, the value assigned to
228              Data-Flow Analysis




      FIG, 8.4 Flowgraph for which associating data-flow information with edges produces better
               results than associating it with node entries.


                 w in B4 is the constant 3. Regardless of whether we associate information with node
                 entries or with edges, we know that on exit from both B2 and B3, both u and v have
                 constant values. If we do constant propagation and associate data-flow information
                 with the edges, then we preserve the fact that, on the edge from B2 to B4, u has value
                 1 and v has value 2, and on the edge from B3 to B4, u has value 2 and v has value
                 1. This allows the flow function for B4 to combine the distinct values to determine
                 that B4 in turn assigns the constant value 3 to w. On the other hand, if we associate
                 the data-flow information with node entries, then all we know at entry to B4 is that
                 neither u’s value nor v’s value is a constant (in both cases, the value is either 1 or
                 2, but the lattice ICP doesn’t provide a way to distinguish that information from
                 T, and even if it did, it would not be enough for us to determine that w’s value is a
                 constant).



8.3              Taxonomy o f Data-Flow Problems and
                  Solution Methods
                 Data-flow analysis problems are categorized along several dimensions, including the
                 following:

            1.   the information they are designed to provide;
            2.   whether they are relational or involve independent attributes;
            3.   the types of lattices used in them and the meanings attached to the lattice elements
                 and functions defined on them; and
            4.   the direction of information flow: in the direction of program execution (forward
                 problems), opposite the direction of execution (backward problems), or in both
                 directions (bidirectional problems).
    Section 8.3    Taxonomy of Data-Flow Problems and Solution Methods                    229


         Almost all the problems we consider are examples of the independent-attribute
    type, i.e., they assign a lattice element to each object of interest, be it a variable def­
    inition, expression computation, or whatever. Only a few, such as the structure type
    determination problem described in Section 8.14, require that the data-flow state of
    a procedure at each point be expressed by a relation that describes the relationships
    among the values of the variables, or something similar. The relational problems
    have much greater computational complexity than the independent-attribute prob­
    lems.
         Similarly, almost all the problems we consider are one-directional, either for­
    ward or backward. Bidirectional problems require forward and backward propa­
    gation at the same time and are more complicated to formulate and, in the average
    case, to solve than one-directional problems. Happily, in optimization, bidirectional
    problems are rare. The most important instance is the classic formulation of partial-
    redundancy elimination, mentioned in Section 13.3, and even it has been superseded
    by the more modern version presented there, which uses only unidirectional anal­
    yses.
         Among the most important data-flow analyses for program optimization are
    those described below. In each case, we give a fuller characterization of the prob­
    lem and the equations for it when we describe the first optimization for which it is
    useful.
Reaching Definitions
   This determines which definitions of a variable (i.e., assignments to it) may reach
   each use of the variable in a procedure. As we have seen, it is a forward problem
   that uses a lattice of bit vectors with one bit corresponding to each definition of a
   variable.
Available Expressions
   This determines which expressions are available at each point in a procedure, in the
    sense that on every path from the entry to the point there is an evaluation of the
    expression, and none of the variables occurring in the expression are assigned values
    between the last such evaluation on a path and the point. Available expressions is a
    forward problem that uses a lattice of bit vectors in which a bit is assigned to each
    definition of an expression.
Live Variables
    This determines for a given variable and a given point in a program whether there is
    a use of the variable along some path from the point to the exit. This is a backward
    problem that uses bit vectors in which each use of a variable is assigned a bit
    position.
Upwards Exposed Uses
   This determines what uses of variables at particular points are reached by partic­
   ular definitions. It is a backward problem that uses bit vectors with a bit position
   corresponding to each use of a variable. It is the dual of reaching definitions in that
   one connects definitions to uses, while the other connects uses to definitions. Note
   that these are typically different, as shown by the example in Figure 8.5, where the
   definition of x in B2 reaches the uses in B4 and B5, while the use in B5 is reached by
   the definitions in B2 and B3.
230              Data-Flow Analysis




                                exit

      FIG. 8.5 Example that differentiates reaching definitions from upwards exposed uses.


            Copy-Propagation Analysis
               This determines that on every path from a copy assignment, say x <- y, to a use
               of variable x there are no assignments to y. This is a forward problem that uses bit
               vectors in which each bit position represents a copy assignment.
            Constant-Propagation Analysis
               This determines that on every path from an assignment of a constant to a variable,
               say, x <r- const, to a use of x the only assignments to x assign it the value const.
               This is a forward flow problem. In its classic formulation, it uses vectors with one
               position per variable and values drawn from the lattice ICP” discussed in Section 8.2,
               or from a similar lattice with elements chosen from another appropriate data type. In
               its sparse conditional form (see Section 12.6) it uses a similar lattice, but one lattice
               value per definition and symbolic execution, rather than simple data-flow analysis.
            Partial-Redundancy Analysis
                This determines what computations are performed twice (or more times) on some
                execution path without the operands being modified between the computations. As
                originally formulated by Morel and Renvoise, it is a bidirectional flow problem that
                uses bit vectors in which each position represents an expression computation. Their
                formulation also determines redundant variable definitions and assignments. A more
                recent formulation of the problem has shown that it can be performed as a series of
                forward and backward data-flow computations.

                     The flow-analysis problems listed above are not the only ones encountered in
                 optimization, but they are among the most important.
                     There are many approaches to solving data-flow problems, including the follow­
                 ing (see Section 8.16 for detailed source information):

            1.   Allen’s strongly connected region method;
            2.   KildalPs iterative algorithm (see Section 8.4);
           Section 8.4    Iterative Data-Flow Analysis                                        231


      3.   Ullman’s T1-T2 analysis;
      4.   Kennedy’s node-listing algorithm;
      5.   Farrow, Kennedy, and Zucconi’s graph-grammar approach;
      6.   elimination methods, e.g., interval analysis (see Section 8.8);
      7.   Rosen’s high-level (syntax-directed) approach;
      8.   structural analysis (see Section 8.7); and
      9.   slotwise analysis (see Section 8.9).

           Here we concentrate on three approaches: (1) the simple iterative approach, with
           several strategies for determining the order of the iterations; (2) an elimination
           or control-tree-based method using intervals; and (3) another control-tree-based
           method using structural analysis. As we shall see, these methods present a range
           of ease of implementation, speed and space requirements, and ease of incrementally
           updating the data-flow information to avoid totally recomputing it. We then make
           a few remarks about other approaches, such as the recently introduced slotwise
           analysis.


8.4        Iterative Data-Flow Analysis
           Iterative analysis is the method we used in the example in Section 8.1 to perform
           reaching definitions analysis. We present it first because it is the easiest method
           to implement and, as a result, the one most frequently used. It is also of primary
           importance because the control-tree-based methods discussed in Section 8.6 need to
           be able to do iterative analysis (or node splitting or data-flow analysis over a lattice
           of functions) on improper (or irreducible) regions of code.
                We first present an iterative implementation of forward analysis. Methods for
           backward and bidirectional problems are easy generalizations.
                We assume that we are given a flowgraph G = (N, E) with en try and e x it
           blocks in N and a lattice L and desire to compute in(B), out(B) e L for each B e N ,
           where in{B) represents the data-flow information on entry to B and out(B) repre­
           sents the data-flow information on exit from £ , given by the data-flow equations




                         I
                          lnit                 for B = en try
                             | |      out(P)   otherwise
                          PePred(B)


               out(B) = Ffi(m(B))

           where Init represents the appropriate initial value for the data-flow information on
           entry to the procedure, Fb ( ) represents the transformation of the data-flow infor­
           mation corresponding to executing block £ , and n models the effect of combining
           the data-flow information on the edges entering a block. Of course, this can also be
           expressed with just in{ ) functions as
232              D ata-Flow Analysis


                   procedure Worklist_Iterate(N,entry,F,dfin,Init)
                      N: in set of Node
                      entry: in Node
                      F: in Node x L —> L
                      dfin: out Node — > L
                      Init: in L
                   begin
                      B, P: Node
                      Worklist: set of Node
                      effect, totaleffect: L
                      dfin(entry) := Init
                 *    Worklist := N - {entry}
                      for each B e N do
                         dfin(B) := t
                      od
                      repeat
                 *       B := ♦Worklist
                         Worklist -= {B}
                         totaleffect := t
                         for each P e Pred(B) do
                             effect := F(P,dfin(P))
                             totaleffect n= effect
                         od
                         if dfin(B) * totaleffect then
                             dfin(B) := totaleffect
                 *          Worklist u= Succ(B)
                         fi
                       until Worklist = 0
                    end    II Worklist.Iterate

      FIG. 8.6 Worklist algorithm for iterative data-flow analysis (statements that manage the worklist
               are marked with asterisks).




                               I
                                  Init                    for B = en try
                                     |~~]     Fp(in(P))   otherwise

                                  PePred(B)
                 If u models the effect of combining flow information, it is used in place of n in the
                 algorithm. The value of Init is usually T or JL.
                      The algorithm W o r k lis t _ I t e r a te ( ), given in Figure 8.6, uses just in( ) func­
                 tions; the reader can easily modify it to use both in( )s and out{ )s. The strategy is
                 to iterate application of the defining equations given above, maintaining a worklist
                 of blocks whose predecessors’ in( ) values have changed on the last iteration, un­
                 til the worklist is empty; initially the worklist contains all blocks in the flowgraph
                 except en try , since its information will never change. Since the effect of combin­
                 ing information from edges entering a node is being modeled by n, the appropriate
                 initialization for t o t a l e f f e c t is T . The function F b (x ) is represented by F (B ,x ).
                      The computational efficiency of this algorithm depends on several things: the lat­
                 tice L, the flow functions F b ( ), and how we manage the worklist. While the lattice
             Section 8.4           Iterative Data-Flow Analysis                                          233

TABLE 8.2 Flow functions for the flowgraph in Figure 7.4.

             Pentry = id
             Eb i ( ( * 1 *2 *3 *4 *5 *6 *7 *8 > ) =   (11 l x 4X500x8>
             PB2 = id
             P B 3 ( ( x I x 2X 3X4X 5X 6X 7X $ )) =   ( * 1* 2* 3 1 * 5* 6* 7 0 )
             Fb4 = id
             PB5 = id
             EB6((*1*2*3*4*5*6*7*8)) = <*l0001 111)


             and flow functions are determined by the data-flow problem we are solving, the man­
             agement of the worklist is independent of it. Note that managing the worklist cor­
             responds to how we implement the statements marked with asterisks in Figure 8.6.
             The easiest implementation would use a stack or queue for the worklist, without re­
             gard to how the blocks are related to each other by the flowgraph structure. On the
             other hand, if we process all predecessors of a block before processing it, then we
             can expect to have the maximal effect on the information for that block each time we
             encounter it. This can be achieved by beginning with an ordering we encountered in
             the preceding chapter, namely, reverse postorder, and continuing with a queue. Since
             in postorder a node is not visited until all its depth-first spanning-tree successors
             have been visited, in reverse postorder it is visited before any of its successors have
             been. If A is the maximal number of back edges on any acyclic path in a flowgraph
             G, then A + 2 passes through the re p e at loop are sufficient if we use reverse pos­
             torder.4 Note that it is possible to construct flowgraphs with A on the order of |N|,
             but that this is very rare in practice. In almost all cases A < 3, and frequently A = 1.
                  As an example of the iterative forward algorithm, we repeat the example we
             did informally in Section 8.1. The flow functions for the individual blocks are given
             in Table 8.2, where id represents the identity function. The initial value of dfin(B)
             for all blocks is (00000000). The path-combining operator is u or bitwise logical or
             on the bit vectors. The initial worklist is {B l, B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, e x i t } , in reverse
             postorder.
                  Entering the rep eat loop, the initial value of B is Bl, with the worklist becoming
             {B2, B3, B4, B5, B6, e x i t } . B l’s only predecessor is P = en try, and the result of
             computing e f f e c t and t o t a l e f f e c t is (00000000), unchanged from the initial
             value of df in (B l), so B l’s successors are not put into the worklist.
                  Next, we get B = B2 and the worklist becomes {B3, B4, B5, B6, e x i t } . The only
             predecessor of B2 is P = Bl, and the result of computing e f f e c t and t o t a l e f f e c t is
             (11100000), which becomes the new value of df in (B 2 ), and e x it is added to the
             worklist to produce {B3, B4, B5, B6, e x it}.
                  Next, we get B = B3, and the worklist becomes {B4, B5, B6, e x it}. B3 has one
             predecessor, namely, Bl, and the result of computing e f f e c t and t o t a l e f f e c t is


             4. If we keep track of the number of blocks whose data-flow information changes in each pass,
             instead of simply whether there have been any changes, this bound can be reduced to A + 1.
234   Data-Flow Analysis


      (11100000), which becomes the new value of d fin (B 3 ), and B4 is put onto the
      worklist.
           Then we get B = B4, and the worklist becomes {B5, B6, exit}. B4 has two
      predecessors, B3 and B6, with B3 contributing (11110000) to effect, totaleffect,
      and dfin(B4), and B6 contributing (00001111), so that the final result of this
      iteration is dfin(B4) = (11111111) and the worklist becomes {B5, B6, exit}.
           Next, B = B5, and the worklist becomes {B6, exit}. B5 has one predecessor, B4,
      which contributes (11111111) to effect, totaleffect, and df in(B5), and exit is
      added to the worklist.
           Next, B = B6, and the worklist becomes { e x i t } . B6’s one predecessor, B4,
      contributes (11111111) to df in (B 6 ), and B4 is put back onto the worklist.
           Now e x it is removed from the worklist, resulting in {B4}, and its two prede­
      cessors, B2 and B5, result in df in ( e x it ) = (11111111).
           The reader can check that the body of the re p e at loop is executed twice more
      for each element of the worklist, but that no further changes result in the df in ( )
      values computed in the last iteration. One can also check that the results are identical
      to those computed in Section 8.1.
           Converting the algorithm above to handle backward problems is trivial, once
      we have properly posed a backward problem. We can either choose to associate the
      data-flow information for a backward problem with the entry to each block or with
      its exit. To take advantage of the duality between forward and backward problems,
      we choose to associate it with the exit.
           As for a forward analysis problem, we assume that we are given a flowgraph
      G = (N, E) with entry and e x it blocks in N and that we desire to compute
      out(B) e L for each B e N where out(B) represents the data-flow information on
      exit from B, given by the data-flow equations

                       Init                for B = e x it
          out(B) =        | |      in(P)   otherwise
                       PeSucc(B)



          in(B) = FsioutiB))

      where Init represents the appropriate initial value for the data-flow information
      on exit from the procedure, F#( ) represents the transformation of the data-flow
      information corresponding to executing block B in reverse, and n models the effect
      of combining the data-flow information on the edges exiting a block. As for forward-
      flow problems, they can also be expressed with just out( ) functions as

                       Init                      for B = e x it
          out(B) =        [""]     Fp(out(P))    otherwise
                       PeSucc(B)


      If u models the effect of combining flow information, it is used in place of n in the
      algorithm.
      Section 8.5    Lattices of Flow Functions                                          235

           Now the iterative algorithm for backward problems is identical to that given
      for forward problems in Figure 8.6, with the appropriate substitutions: out( ) for
      in( ), e x it for entry, and Succ{ ) for Pred{ ). The most effective way to manage
      the worklist is by initializing it in reverse preorder, and the computational efficiency
      bound is the same as for the forward iterative algorithm.


8.5   Lattices o f Flow Functions
      Just as the objects on which we perform a data-flow analysis are best viewed as
      elements of a lattice, the set of flow functions we use in performing such an analysis
      also forms a lattice with its meet and join induced by those of the underlying lattice.
      As we shall see in Section 8.6, the induced lattice of monotone flow functions is very
      important to formulating the control-tree-based approaches to data-flow analysis.
          In particular, let L be a given lattice and let LF denote the set of all monotone
      functions from L to L, i.e.,
          f e L f if and only if Vx, y e L x ^ y implies f(x ) c f(y)
      Then the induced pointwise meet operation on LF given by
              8 € LF, Vx € L (f n g)(x) = f{x ) n g(x)
      and the corresponding induced join and order functions are all easily checked to be
      well defined, establishing that LF is indeed a lattice. The bottom and top elements of
      L f are J_F and T F, defined by
          Vx e L l F(x) = 1 and T F(x) = T
          To provide the operations necessary to do control-tree-based data-flow analysis,
      we need to define one more function in and two more operations on LF. The
      additional function is simply the identity function id, defined by id(x) = x, Vx € L.
      The two operations are composition and Kleene (or iterative) closure. For any two
      functions f , g e LF, the composition of f and g, written f o g, is defined by

          (f 0 g)(x) = f(g(x))
      It is easily shown that LF is closed under composition. Also, for any f € LF, we define
      f n by
          f ° = id and for w > 1, f n = f o f n~ l
      The Kleene closure of f e LF, written f *, is defined by
          Vx e L f*(x ) = lim (i d n f ) n(x)
                          «-> 00
      Also, as is usual, we define f + = f o f*. To show that LF is closed under Kleene
      closure, we rely on the fact that our lattices all have finite effective heights under
      all the functions we use. This implies that if we compute for any Xo € L the sequence
          X/+i = (id n f)(xi)
      there is an i such that x* = x z+\ and so, clearly, f*(xo) = x z.
236     Data-Flow Analysis


            It is easy to show that if L is a lattice of bit vectors, say BV”, then for every
        function f : BV" -> BV”, f is strongly distributive over meet and join, i.e.,

            V*, y, f ix u y) = f{x ) u f(y) and f(x n y) = f(x ) n f(y)
        Also, as long as the various bit positions change independently of each other, as is
        the case for all the bit-vector analyses we consider, BV” has effective height 1, i.e.,
        f o /* = /*, so f * = id n f. As we shall see in the next section, this makes control-tree-
        based data-flow analyses that are representable by bit vectors very efficient.


8.6     Control-Tree-Based Data-Flow Analysis
        The algorithms for control-tree-based data-flow analysis, namely, interval analysis
        and structural analysis, are very similar in that they are both based on the use of
        the control trees discussed in Sections 7.6 and 7.7. They are significantly harder to
        implement than iterative methods—requiring node splitting, iteration, or solving of a
        data-flow problem on the lattice of monotone functions to handle improper regions,
        if they occur—but they have the advantage of being more easily adapted to a form
        that allows for incremental updating of the data-flow information as a program is
        changed by optimizing transformations.
             As a whole, control-tree-based methods are known, for historical reasons, as
        elimination methods. They involve making two passes over the control tree for
        a procedure, which is assumed to have been built by either structural or interval
        control-flow analysis, as mentioned above. In each pass, they visit each node in
        the control tree: in the first pass, performed bottom up, i.e., starting from the basic
        blocks, they construct a flow function that represents the effect of executing the part
        of the procedure that is represented by that portion of the control tree; in the second
        pass, performed top down, i.e., starting from the abstract node representing the
        whole procedure and from initial information corresponding to either the entry (for
        forward problems) or the exit (for backward problems), they construct and evaluate
        data-flow equations that propagate the data-flow information into and through the
        region represented by each control-tree node, using the flow functions constructed
        in the first pass.


8.7     Structural Analysis
        Structural analysis uses the detailed information about control structures developed
        by structural control-flow analysis to produce corresponding data-flow equations
        that represent the data-flow effects of the control structures. We begin with it be­
        cause it is simpler to describe and understand, and because, once we have all the
        mechanisms we need for it, those needed for interval analysis are simply a subset of
        them.

8.7.1   Structural Analysis: Forward Problems
        To begin with, we assume that we are performing a forward analysis—as we shall
        see, backward analyses are a bit trickier since the control-flow constructs each have
           Section 8.7    Structural Analysis                                                 237



                                                i
                                             if-then

                                                    ^if-then




FIG. 8.7 Flow functions for structural analysis of an if-th en construct.


          a single entry, but may have multiple exits. Also, we assume, as for our iterative
          algorithm, that the effect of combining data-flow information where several control-
          flow paths merge is modeled by n.
               In performing a structural data-flow analysis, most of the abstract graphs we
          encounter in the first pass are simple regions of the types shown schematically in
          Figures 7.35 and 7.36. The flow function Fg for a basic block is the same as it is for
          iterative analysis—it depends only on the problem being solved and on the contents
          of the basic block.
               Now, assume that we have an if- th e n construct, as shown in Figure 8.7, with
          the flow functions for each construct given on the edges leaving it. Then, the flow
          function F^f-then constructed for it in the first pass is related to the flow functions
          for the components of the if- th e n as follows:

               ^if-then = (fthen 0 fif /y) n F i f /N
          i.e., the effect of executing the if- th e n construct is the result of combining (by the
          path-combining operator n) the effect of executing the i f part and exiting it on the
          Y branch followed by executing the then part, with the effect of executing the i f
          part and exiting it on the N branch.
                Note that we can choose either to distinguish the Y and N exits from the if and
          to have distinct flow functions Fi f /y and ^ if/N f ° r them, or not. Had we chosen
          not to distinguish them, as in our presentation of iterative analysis above, we would
          simply have a single flow function for the if, namely, F ^f, rather than F±±/ y and
          F ff/N , i.e., we would have

               ^if-then = (^then ° ^if) n ^if = (^then n          o F^f
          Either approach is legitimate—the former may yield more precise information than
          the latter, in case the branches of the i f discriminate among data-flow values of
          interest to us, as for example in constant propagation or bounds-checking analysis.
          In our examples below, however, we use the latter approach, as is customary.
               The data-flow equations constructed in the second pass tell us how, given data­
          flow information entering the if- th e n construct, to propagate it to the entry of each
          of the substructures. They are relatively transparent:
               m(if)     = m(if-then)
               m(then) = F ± f / y(*«(if))
238              Data-Flow Analysis




                                                            if-then-else

                                                                   ^if-then-else




      FIG. 8.8 Flow functions for structural analysis of an if-th e n -e lse construct.


                 or, if we choose not to distinguish exits:
                     m ( if )   = w (if-th en )
                     m(then) = F^f (m (if))
                 The first of these equations can be read as saying that on entry to the i f part, we
                 have the same data-flow information that we have on entry to the if- th e n construct,
                 and the second as saying that on entry to the then part, we have the result of
                 transforming the information on entry to the i f by the data-flow effect of the i f part,
                 exiting it on the Y branch. The second pair is identical, except for not distinguishing
                 the exits from the i f part.
                      Next, we consider how to extend this to an if- t h e n - e ls e construct, and then
                 to a while loop. The form of an if- t h e n - e ls e is shown in Figure 8.8 and the
                 functions are an easy generalization of those for the if- th e n case. The flow function
                 ^ if- t h e n - e ls e constructed in the first pass is related to the flow functions for the
                 components as follows:

                     ^ if- t h e n - e ls e = (^then 0 ^ i f /y) n (^ e lse ° ^ i f / n)
                 and the propagation functions constructed in the second pass are
                     m ( if )   = m (if- th e n - e lse )
                     m(then) = F ^ f^ {m {± f))
                     m (else ) = F±f / N(m (if))

                      For a while loop, we have the form shown in Figure 8.9. In the bottom-up pass,
                 the flow function that expresses the result of iterating the loop once and coming back
                 to its entry is Fbody 0 ^while/Y’ so       rcsu^ of doing this an arbitrary number of
                 times is given by this function’s Kleene closure

                     ^loop = (^body ° ^while/y)
                 and the result of executing the entire while loop is given by executing the while and
                 body blocks repetitively, followed by executing the while block and exiting it on the
                 N branch, i.e.,

                     ^while-loop = ^while/N ° ^loop
          Section 8.7     Structural Analysis                                                      239




                                                           while-loop

                                                  F while-loop



FIG. 8.9 Flow functions for structural analysis of a while loop.


          Note that in the most common case, namely, a bit-vector problem,

               (^body 0 ^w hile/y)*
          is simply

               id n (Fbody o Fwhile/Y)

          but that the equations above are valid regardless of the forward-flow problem being
          solved. In the top-down pass, we have for the while loop
               m(while) = Fi00p(m(while-loop))

               m(body) = Fwhile/Y(m(while))

          since the while part can be reached either from outside the loop or by iterating it,
          and the body can be reached only by entering the loop, executing the while and body
          blocks some number of times (possibly zero), and exiting the while block through
          the Y branch.
              Again, if we don’t distinguish between the exits, we have

               ^loop = (^body ° ^while)*
          and the result of executing the entire while loop is given by executing the while and
          body blocks repetitively, followed by executing the while block and exiting it on the
          N branch, i.e.,
               ^while-loop = ^while ° ^loop

                              = ^while ° (^body ° ^while)
               m(while)       = Fi00p(m(while-loop))

               m(body)        = Fwhile(m(while))
               It should be clear from the if- th e n and if- t h e n - e ls e cases how to generalize
          the construction of the equations to a general acyclic region A. In particular, suppose
          that the abstract nodes making up the acyclic region are BO, B l , . . . , B «, with BO as
          the entry node of the region, and with each Bi having exits B/ / 1 , . . . , Bi/ei (of course,
          in most cases et = 1, and only very rarely is it larger than 2). Associate a forward-
          flow function Bsi/e with each Bi/e from it, in the usual way, and let P(A, Bi^/e^)
240   Data-Flow Analysis


      denote the set of all possible paths from the entry of A to some abstract node’s exit
      Bifr/ek in   F ° r the bottom-up pass, given the path

          p = BO/e0, B h /e u . . . , Bik/ek € P(A, Bik/ek)

      the composite flow function for the path is

          Fp   = pBik/ek ° ***° F si^/ei ° PB/'oM)
      and the flow function corresponding to all possible paths from the entry point of A
      to node exit Bi^/e^ is

          F(A,Bik/ek) =        FI        FP
                           peP(A,Bik/ek)
           For the top-down pass, for the entry to Bi, for i ± 0, let Pp(A, Bi) denote the set
      of all P(A, B j/e) such that Bj e Pred(Bi) and exit Bj/e leads to Bi. Then




                      I
                          ini A)                                  for i = 0
                                   PI          F(A,Bj/e)(in(A))    otherwise

                          P(A,Bj/e)ePp(A,Bi)
           For a general cyclic but proper region C, there is a single back edge leading from
      some block Be to the entry block BO. If we remove the back edge, the result is an
      acyclic region. Proceeding as above, we construct flow functions that correspond to
      following all possible paths from C ’s entry to Bi^/e^ in the acyclic region that results
      from removing the back edge. This gives us a collection of flow functions F(c,Bik/ek)
      and, in particular, if Bc/e is the tail of the back edge, a function

          Fiter = F(C,Bc/e   )
      that represents the result of performing one iteration of the body of the region. Thus,
          Fc = F*ter
      represents the overall data-flow effect of executing the region and returning to its
      entry, and

          F [c,Bik/ek) = F (C,Bik/ek) ° F C

      represents the effect of executing the region and exiting it from Bi^/e^. Correspond­
      ingly, for the top-down pass,
                        in(C)                                      for / = 0
          in(Bi) =                 I” !        ^ B j/e ^ F O ))    otherwise
                        P(C,Bj/e)ePp(C,Bi)

           For an improper region R, in the bottom-up pass we construct a set of equations
      similar to those for the general acyclic region above that represent the data-flow
      effect of a path from the region’s entry to any point within it. In the top-down
      pass, we use the functions constructed in the bottom-up pass to propagate the data­
      flow information to each point within the region in the usual way, starting with the
            Section 8.7       Structural Analysis                                                241




FIG. 8.10 An improper region.


            information we have at its entry. The major difference between these equations and
            those for the acyclic case is that the top-down system for the improper region R is
            recursive, since the region contains multiple cycles. Given the system of equations,
            we can proceed in any of three ways, as follows:

       1.   We can use node splitting, which can turn improper regions into proper ones with
            (possibly many) more nodes.
      2.    We can solve the recursive system of equations iteratively, using as initial data
            whatever the equations for the surrounding constructs yield us at the entry to R,
            each time we solve the data-flow problem.
       3.   We can view the system of equations as itself a forward data-flow problem defined,
            not over L, but over LF (the lattice of monotone functions from L to L that we
            discussed in Section 8.5), and solve it, producing flow functions that correspond to
            the paths within the region; this requires that the underlying lattice L be finite, which
            is sufficient for most of the problems we consider, including all the bit-vector ones.

            For example, consider the simple improper region in Figure 8.10, and suppose
            that it reduces to the region called B la , as shown. Then the bottom-up equation
            for ^ B la is

                ^ B la = ((f B3 0 f B2)+ ° f B l) n ((^B3 ° f B2)* ° ^B3 ° ^B l)

            since a trip through B la in the forward direction goes either through B1 followed by
            one or more trips through either the pair made up of B2 followed by B3 or through
            B1 followed by B3 followed by zero or more iterations of the pair B2 followed by B3.
            For the top-down equations, one gets the recursive system
                m (Bl) = m (Bla)
                in(B2) = FBi(m (B l)) n FB3(m(B3))
                m(B3) = FBi(m (B l)) n FB2(*>*(B2))

            or we can solve the equations for in(B2) and m(B3) in the function lattice to produce

                in(B2) = (((FB3 ° ^B2)* ° f B l) n ((^B3 ° ^B 2)* o FB3 ° ^ B l))(/W(B1))
                          = ((F b 3 ° ^B2)* 0       n ^B3) ° FB1)(in(Bl))
242           D ata-Flow Analysis




                                                    while                                  block




                                                                 entry
                                                 if-then-
                                                   else                     block
                                                                 Bla                       entrya


                                                                 exit



  FIG. 8.11   Structural control-flow analysis of our reaching definitions example.


              and
                    m(B3) = (((F b 2 ° ^B3)* ° ^B l) n ((^B2 ° ^B3)* ° ^B2 ° ^ B l))(/W(B1))
                           = i(FB3 ° ^B2)* ° (id n f B2 ) o FB1)(m (B l))
                   As an example of a forward structural data-flow analysis, we continue with our
              reaching definitions instance. First, we must do the structural control-flow analysis
              for it, as shown in Figure 8.11. The first equation we construct in the bottom-up pass
              of the data-flow analysis is for the w hile loop, as follows (and since distinguishing
              Y and N exits makes no difference in computing reaching definitions, we omit them):

                    ^B4a = ^B4 ° (^B6 ° ^B4)* = ^B4 ° (id n (FB 6 ° ^B4))
              The others are, for the block reduced to B3a:

                    FB3 cl = FBb ° f B4a ° FB3
              for the i f - t h e n - e l s e reduced to B la:

                    FBla. = (^B2 ° FB l) n (f B3a ° FB l)
Section 8.7     Structural Analysis                                                243


and for the block reduced to entrya:

    Gentry a = F e x it ° ^Bla ° Gentry
As we shall see, the last equation is actually not used in the data-flow analysis.
    In the top-down pass, we construct for the components of the entrya block the
equations
    in (entry) = In it

    in { Bla)   = Gentry      (entry))
    m (exit) = FB la (m(Bla))
for the if- th e n - e ls e reduced to Bla:
     m(Bl) = m(Bla)
    m(B2) = m(B3a) = Fgi(m (Bla))
for the block reduced to B3a:
     m(B3) = m(B3a)
    m(B4a) = Fg3(m(B3a))
    m(B5) = Fg4a (m(B4a))
and for the while loop reduced to B4a:
    in{B4) = (FB6 o FB4)*(m(B4a)) = (id n (FBg o FB4))(m(B4a))
    m(B6) = FB4(m(B4))
     The initial value of m(entry) and the flow functions for the individual blocks
are identical to those in the iterative example above (see Table 8.2). Our first step in
solving the equations for the in( ) values by hand is to simplify the equations for the
compound flow functions, as follows:
    f B4a = f B4 ° (f B6 ° f B4)*
           = Fb 4 o (id n (FBg o Fb4))
           = id o (id n (FBg o id))
           = id n FBg

    f B3a = f B5 ° f B4a ° f B3
          = id o (id n FBg) o FB3
          = (id n FBg) o FB3
          = f B4a ° f B3

    f B la = (f B2 ° f Bl) n (f B3a ° f Bl)
          = (id o FB1) n ((id n FBg) o FB3 o FB^)
          = FBi n ((id n FBg) o FB3 o FBi )
244           Data-Flow Analysis


 TABLE 8.3 in( ) values computed by
           structural analysis for our
           reaching definitions example.

              m(entry)     =   (00000000)
              in ( Bl)     =   (00000000)
              in ( B2)     =   (11100000)
              m(B3)        =   (11100000)
              in ( B4)     =   (11111111)
              m(B5)        =   (11111111)
              in ( B6)     =   (11111111)
              m(exit)      =   (11111111)




              We then compute the values of in( ) starting from in (entry) and using the available
              values of the F#( ) functions, which results in the values shown in Table 8.3. The
              reader can check that the in { ) values for the individual basic blocks are identical to
              those computed by the iterative approach (Section 8.1).


8.7.2         Structural Analysis: Backward Problems
              As remarked at the beginning of the previous section, backward problems are some­
              what harder for structural analysis since the control-flow constructs we use are
              guaranteed to each have a single entry, but not necessarily a single exit.
                   For constructs with a single exit, such as the if- th e n or if- th e n - e ls e , we
              can simply “ turn the equations around.” Given the if- t h e n - e ls e in Figure 8.12,
              the equation constructed in the bottom-up pass for backward flow through the i f -
              th e n -e lse is

                  ^if-then-else = (®if/Y ° ^then) n (®if /N ° ^else)




  FIG. 8.12   Flow functions for backward structural analysis of an if- t h e n - e ls e construct.
Section 8.7       Structural Analysis                                                     24 5


and the equations for the top-down pass are

    o ^(th en ) = ou t(±f-th e n -e lse )
    out(e ls e ) = ow £(if-th en -else)
    out(i f )     = B-tYieniout(then)) n Bei s e {out{%lse ))

    For a general acyclic region A, suppose again that the abstract nodes making
up the acyclic region are BO, B I , . . . , Bn. Let BO be the entry node of the region,
and let each Bi have entries B / / 1 , . . . , Bi/ej (of course, in most cases e* = 1 or 2,
and only rarely is it larger than 2). Associate a backward-flow function Bsi/e with
each Bi and entry e to it, and let P{Bi}z/e ^ Bii/ej) denote the set of all possible
(forward) paths from some Bi^/e^ to Bif/e^ For the bottom-up pass, given some
path p e P{Bik/efo B ije i), the composite backward-flow function for the path is

    Bp —              o   .. .o


Define Exits(A) to be the set of exit blocks of region A, i.e., Bi e Exits(A) if and
only if there exists Bj e Succ(Bi) such that Bj $ A. Then the backward-flow function
corresponding to all possible paths from Bi^/e^ to all possible exits from the region
A is

    B(A ,B ik/ek) “         PI          Bp
                      peP(Bik/eh Bii/ei)
                         BiieExits(A)

For the top-down pass, for each exit block Bj from A, we have data-flow information
out(Bj) associated with it. Let PS(A, Bi) denote the set of all P(B j/e, B k /f) such that
Bj e Succ(Bi) and Bk e Exits(A). Then




                  I
                      out (A)                                          if Bi e Exits(A)
                                  I” ]            B(A,Bj/e)(out(Bk))   otherwise

                      P(Bj/e9B k /f)e P s(A,Bi)

     For a general cyclic but proper region C, we combine the method above for an
acyclic region with that for forward problems for a cyclic proper region. Again, there
is a single back edge leading from some block Be to the entry block BO, and if we
remove the back edge, the result is an acyclic region. We construct backward-flow
functions that correspond to following all possible (backward) paths from all of C ’s
exits to B i J in the acyclic region that results from removing the back edge. This
gives us a collection of flow functions B(c,Bik/ek) and, in particular, if Bc/e is the head
of the back edge, a function
    Biter — B(C,Bc/e)

that represents the result of performing one iteration of the body of the region. Thus,

    Be = B*ter
24 6           Data-Flow Analysis


               represents the overall backward data-flow effect of executing the region and return­
               ing to its entry, and

                   B '(C,Bik/ek) “ B (C ,B ik/ek) ° # C

               represents the backward data-flow effect of executing the region backward, starting
               from its exits to some node Bi£ within it. Correspondingly, for the top-down pass,
               for any exit block from Bj of C, we have data-flow information out(Bj) associated
               with it, and for each node Bi within the region, as follows:




                                 I
                                     out(C)                                             if Bi e Exits(C)
                                                n                  B(c9Bj/e)(out(Bk))   otherwise

                                     P (B j/e,B k /f)eP s(C 9Bi)

               where PS(C, Bi) and P(B j/e, B k /f) are as defined for an acyclic region above.
                   The handling of improper regions for backward problems is analogous to their
               handling for forward problems. We construct the corresponding recursive set of
               data-flow equations and either use node splitting, solve them iteratively, or solve
               them as a data-flow problem over LF. The one surprise in this is that the data­
               flow problem over the function lattice turns out to be a forward one, rather than
               a backward one.
                   As an example of a backward problem, consider the region A consisting of
               BO through B5 in Figure 8.13. Let p be the path BO/i, Bl/l, B3/l, B4/i. Then Bp is
               given by
                   BP = b BO/i ° B Bl/l ° b B3/i ° b B4/i




   FIG. 8.13   An acyclic region A for backward structural analysis.
        Section 8.7     Structural Analysis                                          247

        The paths from BO/l to both exits from A are
            p i = BO/l, Bl/l, B3/l, B4/l
            p2 = BO/l, Bl/l, B3/2, B5/1
            p3 = BO/2, B2/l, B3/l, B4/l
            p4 = BO/2, B2/1, B3/2, B5/1
            p5 = BO/2, B2/2, B5/1
        and the backward-flow function from all the exits of A to BO/l is
            £(A,BO/i) = Bp\ n Bpi n Bp3 n B P4 n Bp$
                       = B B0/i o B b1/1 O B B3/1 O B B4/1

                         n B B0/1 ° B B1/1 ° B B3/2 ° B B 5 /\

                         n B B 0 /2 ° B B 2/1 ° B B3/1 ° B B4/1

                         n B B0/2 ° B B 2/1 ° B B3/2 ° B B5/1

                         n BB0/2 o BB2/2 o BB5/\
        and the value of out(BO) is
            o^(BO) = Bpi(out(B4)) n Bp2 (out(BS)) n Bp^(out(B4)) n Bp4 (out(Bb))
                       n Bps(ou t(B5))
                      = b B0/1 (BB1/1 (BB3/1 (^B4/l (o«f(B4)))))

                       n ^ B 0 / l( ^ B l/ l( ^ B 3 / 2 ( ^ B 5 / l( ° ^ ( B5)))))

                       n BB0/2(BB2/1 (BB 3/l(BB4/l (o m ^(B4)))))

                       n B B0/2(B B 2 /l(B B3/2(B B 5 /l(o ^ ( B5)))))

                       n BB0/2(BB2/2(BB 5 /l(°^ (B5))))

8.7.3   Representing Structural Analysis Equations
        The equations used in structural analysis are of two kinds: (1) those for the sim­
        ple forms, such as an if-then-else or while loop, which can be represented by
        code that implements them directly; and (2) those for the complex forms, such as
        improper regions.
             An example of code for a simple structure is given in Figure 8.14. The type
        Component is intended to contain an identifier for each of the possible components
        of a simple structure; here we have restricted it to the components of an if-then-
        else. The type FlowFcn represents functions from variables to lattice values. The
        data-flow analysis assigns such a function to the entry point of each region. The
        argument r of ComputeF.if _then_else ( ) holds a region number; each component
        of a structure has one. The function Region_No: integer x Component -> integer
        returns the region number of the given component of the given region.
248            D ata-Flow Analysis


               Component - enum {if,then,else}
               FlowFcn = Var — > Lattice

               procedure ComputeF_if_then_else(x,r) returns FlowFcn
                  x : in FlowFcn
                  r : in integer
               begin
                  y: FlowFcn
                  y := ComputeF_if(x,Region_No(r,if))
                  return ComputeF_then(y,Region_No(r,then))
                      n ComputeF_else(y,Region_No(r,else))
               end    II ComputeF_if_then_else

               procedure ComputeIn_then(x,r) returns FlowFcn
                  x : in FlowFcn
                  r: in integer
               begin
                  return ComputeF_if(ComputeIn_if(x,r),r)
               end    II ComputeIn_then

  FIG. 8.14 Code representation of some of the structural data-flow equations for an if- th e n - e lse .




  FIG. 8.15    Graphic representation of some of the structural data-flow equations for the region Bla
               in Figure 8.10.


                    The complex forms can be represented in a data-flow analyzer in a variety of
              ways. One relatively simple, time- and space-efficient way is to use graphs with two
              types of nodes, one type for in(B) values and Fg values (including a special one for
              id ), and the other type representing the operations composition “ o” , meet “ n” , join
              “ u” , Kleene closure       non-empty closure “ + ” , and function application “ ( ) ” .
              Note that a function-application node represents the application of its left subgraph
              to its right, and a composition node represents the composition of its left subgraph
              with its right. Figure 8.15 shows the graphic representation of some of the equations
            Section 8.8     Interval Analysis                                                       249

            for the improper region Bla in Figure 8.10. This representation can be used by a
            simple interpreter to apply the equations analyzing the region they correspond to.
                Note that the fact that part of a flowgraph requires the interpreted representa­
            tion does not mean that all of it does. If, for example, we have a simple loop whose
            body is an improper region that contains an i f - t h e n - e l s e construct, then we can
            execute code for the loop and the i f - t h e n - e l s e and use the interpreter for the im­
            proper region.


.8          Interval Analysis
            Now that we have built all the mechanisms to do structural data-flow analysis,
            performing interval analysis is trivial: it is identical to structural analysis, except that
            only three kinds of regions appear, namely, general acyclic, proper, and improper
            ones.
                As an example, consider the original flowgraph from Figure 7.4, which we
            reproduce in Figure 8.16, along with its reduction to intervals. The first step turns
            the loop comprising B4 and B6 into the node B4a, and the second step reduces the
            resulting acyclic structure to the single node en try a. The corresponding forward
            data-flow functions are as follows:
                    fB4a = fB4 ° (^B6 ° ^ 3 4 )*
                          = Fb 4 o {id n (f B 0 o FB4 ))

                          = id o {id n (FBg o id))

                          = id n FBg
                ^entrya = ^exit ° (FB2 n (FB5 ° fB4a ° FB3)) ° fBl ° Gentry




                                                                           acyclic
                                                                                          entrya




FIG. 8.16 Interval control-flow analysis of our reaching definitions example.
250          Data-Flow Analysis


 TABLE 8.4 in()values computed by
           interval analysis for our
           reaching definitions example.

             in (entry)     = (00000000)
             m(Bl)          =   (00000000)
             in( B2)        =   (11100000)
             m(B3)          =   (11100000)
             m(B4)          =   (11111111)
             in(Bb)         = (11111111)
             in ( B6)       = (11111111)
             m(exit)        = (11111111)


             and the equations for in ( ) are as follows:
                  m(entry) = m(entrya) = Init
                  in( Bl)       = F       (in(entry))
                  in( B2)       = F%i(in(Bl))
                  in( B3)       = F B1(m(Bl))
                  m(B4a)        = FB3(m(B3))
                  m(B4)         = m(B4a) n (fBg o FB4)*(m(B4a))
                                = m(B4a) n (id n (fBg o id))(in(B4a))
                                = m(B4a) n m(B4a) n FBg(m(B4a))
                                = m(B4a) n FBg(w(B4a))
                  m(B6)         = FB4(w(B4))
                                = m(B4)
                  m(B5)         = FB4a(w(B4a))
                                = (FB4 o (id n (fBg o FB4)))(m(B4a))
                                = id(in(B4a)) n *d(FBg(/<i(m(B4a))))
                                = in(B4a) n FBg(m(B4a))
                  m(exit)       = FB2(m(B2)) n FB5(w(B5))
             The resulting in( ) values, shown in Table 8.4, are identical to those computed by
             the iterative and structural analyses.


8.9          Other Approaches
             Dhamdhere, Rosen, and Zadeck describe a new approach to data-flow analysis
             that they call slotwise analysis [DhaR92]. Instead of developing long bit vectors
       Section 8.10     Du-Chains, Ud-Chains, and Webs                                      251


       to represent a data-flow characteristic of variables or some other type of program
       construct and operating on the bit vectors by one of the methods described above,
       they, in effect, consider each slot of all the bit vectors separately. That is, first they
       consider what happens to the first slot in all the bit vectors throughout the procedure,
       then the second, and so on. For some data-flow problems, this approach is useless,
       since they depend on combining information from different slots in two or more bit
       vectors to compute the value of a slot in another bit vector. But for many problems,
       such as reaching definitions and available expressions, each slot at a particular
       location in a procedure depends only on that slot at other locations. Further, for
       the available expressions problem, for example, the information in most slots is the
       default value 0 (= unavailable) in most places. This combination can make a slotwise
       approach very attractive.
           In their paper, the authors show how to apply slotwise analysis to partial-
       redundancy analysis, an analysis used in several important commercial compilers.



8.10   Du-Chains, Ud-Chains, and Webs
       Du- and ud-chains are a sparse representation of data-flow information about vari­
       ables. A du-cbain for a variable connects a definition of that variable to all the
       uses it may flow to, while a ud-chain connects a use to all the definitions that may
       flow to it. That the two are different may be seen by inspecting the example in Fig­
       ure 8.5. The du-chain for the x defined in block B2 includes the uses in both blocks
       B4 and B5, while that for the x defined in block B3 includes only the use in block
       B5. The ud-chain for the use of x in block B4 includes only the definition in B2,
       while the ud-chain for the use of x in block B5 includes the definitions in both B2
       and B3.
           Abstractly a du- or ud-chain is a function from a variable and a basic-block-
       position pair to sets of basic-block-position pairs, one for each use or definition,
       respectively. Concretely, they are generally represented by linked lists. They can be
       constructed by solving the reaching definitions data-flow problem for a procedure
       and then using the resulting information to build the linked lists. Once the lists have
       been constructed, the reaching definitions bit vectors can be deallocated, since the
       chains represent the same information. For our purposes, the du- and ud-chains for
       a procedure are represented by functions of the i c a n type UdDuChain, where

           UdDu = integer x integer
           UdDuChain: (Symbol x UdDu) -> set of UdDu

            A web for a variable is the maximal union of intersecting du-chains for the
       variable. Thus, the web for x in Figure 8.5 includes both definitions and both uses,
       while in Figure 8.17, there are two webs for x, one consisting of the definitions in B2
       and B3 and the uses in B4 and B5 and the other containing the definition of x in B5
       and its use in B6. Webs are particularly useful in global register allocation by graph
       coloring (see Chapter 16)—they are the units that are candidates for allocation to
       registers.
252           Data-Flow Analysis




                                                             {«x, <B2,1» ,{<B4,1>,<B5,1»>»
                                                              « x ,<B3,1»,{<B5,1»»
                                                             {«y,<B4,l»,0»
                                                             {«z,<B5,l»,0»
                                                      (b)    {«x,<B5,2»,{<B6,l»»
                                                             {«z,<B6,l»,0»

                                                             <B2,1>     <B3,1>     <B5,2>


                                                             <B4,1>    <BS,1>      <B6,1>



  FIG. 8.17 (a) Example for construction of webs and (b) the webs.


                  Note that one effect of constructing webs is to separate uses of a variable with a
             name like i that may be used over and over again in a procedure as, say, a loop index,
             but whose uses are disjoint from each other. This can significantly improve register
             allocation by reducing the range over which a variable may require a register and can
             improve the effectiveness of other optimizations as well. In particular, optimizations
             that apply to a single variable or that apply to a limited range of program text, such
             as strength reduction applied to induction variables, may benefit from this.


8.11          Static Single-Assignm ent (SSA) Form
             Static single-assignment form is a relatively new intermediate representation that
             effectively separates the values operated on in a program from the locations they
             are stored in, making possible more effective versions of several optimizations.
                  A procedure is in static single-assignment fSSAj form if every variable assigned
             a value in it occurs as the target of only one assignment. In SSA form du-chains are
             explicit in the representation of a procedure: a use of a variable may use the value
             produced by a particular definition if and only if the definition and use have exactly
             the same name for the variable in the SSA form of the procedure. This simplifies
             and makes more effective several kinds of optimizing transformations, including
             constant propagation, value numbering, invariant code motion and removal, strength
             reduction, and partial-redundancy elimination. Thus, it is valuable to be able to
             translate a given representation of a procedure into SSA form, to operate on it and,
             when appropriate, to translate it back into the original form.
                  In translating to SSA form, the standard mechanism is to subscript each of the
             variables and to use so-called ^-functions at join points, such as the entry to B5 in
           Section 8.11      Static Single-Assignment (SSA) Form                                          253




FIG. 8.18 Standard translation of the example in Figure 8.17 into SSA form.


           Figure 8.18, to sort out the multiple assignments to a variable. Each 0 -function has
           as many argument positions as there are versions of the variable coming together
           at that point, and each argument position corresponds to a particular control-flow
           predecessor of the point. Thus, the standard SSA-form representation of our example
           in Figure 8.17 is as shown in Figure 8.18. The variable x has been split into four
           variables x j, X2, X3, and X4, and z has been split into z j, Z2, and Z3, each of which is
           assigned to only once.
                The translation process into SSA form first figures out at what join points to
           insert ^-functions, then inserts trivial 0-functions (i.e., 0-functions of the form
           0 (x, x , . . . , x )) with the number of argument positions equal to the number of
           control-flow predecessors of the join point that some definition of the variable
           reaches, and then renames definitions and uses of variables (conventionally by sub­
           scripting them) to establish the static single-assignment property. Once we have
           finished doing whatever we translated to SSA form for, we need to eliminate the
           0-functions, since they are only a conceptual tool, and are not computationally
           effective—i.e., when we come to a join point with a 0-function while executing a
           procedure, we have no way to determine which branch we came to it by and hence
           which value to use.5
                Translating a procedure to minimal SSA form, i.e., an SSA form with a minimal
           number of 0-functions, can be done by using what are known as dominance fron­
           tiers. For a flowgraph node x, the dominance frontier of x, written D E(x), is the set


           5. An extension of SSA form called g ate d sin gle-assign m en t fo rm includes in each 0-function a
           selector that indicates which position to select according to the path taken to reach a join point.
254   Data-Flow Analysis


      of all nodes y in the flowgraph such that x dominates an immediate predecessor of y
      but does not strictly dominate y, i.e.,

          DF(x) = [y | (3z € Pred(y) such that x dom z) and x \sdom y]

      Computing DF(x) directly for all x would be quadratic in the number of nodes in the
      flowgraph. An algorithm that is linear results from breaking it into the computation
      of two intermediate components, DF/0CJ/(x) and D Fup(x, z), as follows:

           DFfocali* ) = {y eSu cc(x) | id o m (y )^ x )
          D Fup(x, z) = (y € DF(z) | idom(z) = x & idom(y) ± x]

      and computing DF(x) as

          D F(x) = D Flocai(x) U               U          D Fup(x,z)
                                      z e N (idom(z) = x)

           To compute the dominance frontier for a given flowgraph, we turn the above
      equations into the code shown in Figure 8.19. The function value IDom(x) is the set
      of nodes that x immediately dominates (i.e., idom(x) = y if and only if x e IDom(y)),
      and DF(x), on completion, contains the dominance frontier of x. The function
      Post .Order (N ,ID om ) returns a sequence of nodes that is a postorder traversal
      of the dominator tree represented by N and IDom .
           Now, we define for a set of flowgraph nodes S, the dominance frontier of S as

          D F(S) = 1 J DF(x)
                      x eS


      and the iterated dominance frontier D F+ ( ) as

          D F+(S) =     lim D F‘(S)
                        i->oo


      where D F 1(S) = DF(S) and D Fl+1(S) = D F(S U D FZ(S)). If S is the set of nodes
      that assign to variable x, plus the en try node, then D F+ (S) is exactly the set of nodes
      that need ^-functions for x.
           To compute the iterated dominance frontier for a flowgraph, we adapt the
      equations given above, as shown in Figure 8.20. The value of DF_Plus(S) is the
      iterated dominance frontier of the set of nodes S, given that we have precomputed
      DF(x) for all nodes x in the flowgraph. This implementation of computing D F+ (S)
      has a time bound quadratic in the size of the procedure in the worst case, but is
      usually linear in practice.
           As an example of translating to minimal SSA form, consider the flowgraph in
      Figure 8.21. The dominator tree for the flowgraph is shown in Figure 8.22. Using
            Section 8.11   Static Single-Assignment (SSA) Form                              255


            IDom, Succ, Pred: Node — > set of Node

            procedure Dom_Front(N,E,r) returns Node — > set of Node
                N: in set of Node
                E: in set of (Node x Node)
                r : in Node
            begin
                y> z : Node
                P: sequence of Node
                i: integer
                DF: Node — > set of Node
                Domin.Fast(N,r ,IDom)
                P := Post_0rder(N,IDom)
                for i := 1 to IPI do
                     DF(Pli) := 0
                     I| compute local component
                     for each y e Succ(Pli) do
                         if y £ IDom(Pli) then
                             DF(Pli) u= {y}
                         fi
                     od
                     I| add on up component
                     for each z e IDom(Pli) do
                         for each y e DF(z) do
                             if y £ IDom(Pli) then
                                 DF(Pli) u= {y}
                             fi
                         od
                     od
                od
                return DF
            end     I| Dom_Front

FIG. 8.19   Code to compute the dominance frontier of a flowgraph.




            the iterative characterization o f dom inance frontiers given above, we com pute for
            variable k:

                D F 1({entry, Bl, B3}) = {B2}

                DF 2({entry,Bl,B3}) = DF({entry, Bl, B2, B3}) = {B2}

            and for i:

                D F 1({entry, Bl, B3, B6}) = {B2, exit}
                D F 2({entry, Bl, B3, B6}) = DF({entry, Bl, B2, B3, B6, exit})
                                          = {B2,exit}
256           D ata-Flow A n alysis

              procedure DF_Plus(S) returns set of Node
                 S: in set of Node
              begin
                 D, DFP: set of Node
                  change := true: boolean
                 DFP := DF_Set(S)
                 repeat
                     change := false
                     D := DF_Set(S u DFP)
                     if D * DFP then
                        DFP := D
                        change := true
                     fi
                 until !change
                 return DFP
              end     II DF.Plus

              procedure DF_Set(S) returns set of Node
                 S: in set of Node
              begin
                 x: Node
                 D := 0: set of Node
                 for each x e S do
                    D u= DF(x)
                 od
                 return D
              end    I| DF_Set

  FIG. 8.20   Code to compute the iterated dominance frontier of a flowgraph.




  FIG* 8.21   Example flowgraph to be translated to minimal SSA form.
           Section 8.11    Static Single-Assignment (SSA) Form                                 257
                  entry


                   B1


                   B2




                   B5       B6     exit
FIG. 8.22 Dominator tree for the flowgraph in Figure 8.21.

           and for j (as for k):
                D F 1({entry, B1,B3}) = {B2}

                D F2({en try ,B l,B 3 }) = D F({en try, Bl, B2, B3}) = {B2}
           so B2 and e x it are the nodes requiring 0-functions. In particular, B2 requires a 0-
           function for each of i, j , and k, and e x it needs one for i. The result of subscripting
           the variables and inserting the 0-functions is shown in Figure 8.23. Note that the 0-
           function inserted into the e x it block is not really necessary (unless i is live on exit




FIG. 8.23 Result of translating the flowgraph in Figure 8.21 to minimal SSA form.
258    Data-Flow Analysis


       from the procedure); pruned SSA form eliminates such unneeded ^-functions at the
       expense of somewhat increased computation cost.
           Efficient algorithms are given in the literature (see Section 8.16) for translation
       to and from minimal SSA form. There is also experimental evidence [CytF91] of
       the effect of translating to SSA form: the numbers of assignments in 221 Fortran
       77 procedures after translation to SSA form were anywhere from 1.3 to 3.8 times
       the numbers of assignments in the original forms. The occasionally large increase in
       program size is of some concern in using SSA form but, given that it makes some
       optimizations much more effective, it is usually worthwhile.




8.12   Dealing with Arrays, Structures, and Pointers
       So far, we have said nothing in our discussion of data-flow analysis about dealing
       with values more complex than simple constants and variables whose values are
       restricted to such constants. Since variables (and, in some languages, constants) may
       also have arrays, records, pointers, and so on as their values, it is essential that we
       consider how to fit them into our data-flow analysis framework and how to represent
       them in SSA form.
            One option that is used in many compilers is to simply ignore array and record
       assignments and to treat assignments through pointers pessimistically. In this ap­
       proach, it is assumed that a pointer may point to any variable’s value and, hence,
       that an assignment through a pointer may implicitly affect any variable. Languages
       like Pascal provide some help with this issue, as they restrict pointers to point only
       to objects of the types they are declared to be pointers to. Dealing with pointers in
       a way that produces much more useful information requires what is known as alias
       analysis, to which we devote Chapter 10. Pointers into heap storage may be mod­
       eled conservatively by considering the heap to be a single large object, like an array,
       with any assignment through a pointer assumed to both access and change any ob­
       ject in the heap. More aggressive techniques for dealing with pointers and records
       are discussed below in Section 8.14.
            In C, pointers are not even restricted to pointing to heap storage—they may also
       point to objects on the stack and to statically allocated objects. The alias analysis
       methods discussed in Chapter 10 are important for aggressive optimization of C
       programs.
            Some languages allow array assignments in which the values of all elements of an
       array are set at once. Such assignments can be handled easily by considering array
       variables and constants to be just like ordinary variables and constants. However,
       most array assignments set a single element, e.g., A [3]        5 or A [i] <- 2, rather
       than the entire array. Assignments that set a known element can also be treated
       like ordinary assignments, but this still does not account for most array operations.
       One possibility for dealing with assignments that set an array element named by
       a variable is to translate them to a form that uses access and update assignments
       that make them appear to operate on the whole array, as in Figure 8.24. While such
       operators permit our data-flow algorithms to work correctly, they generally produce
             Section 8.13    Automating Construction of Data-Flow Analyzers                      259


            x <- a [i]              x <- a c c e ss(a ,i)
            a [j] <- 4              a <- update(a, j ,4)
            (a)                     (b)
 FIG. 8.24 Assignments involving array elements and their translation into access/update form.


            information that is too crude to be very useful in optimizing array operations. The
            usual alternative is to do dependence analysis of array operations, as discussed in
            Section 9.1, which can provide more precise information about arrays, but at the
            expense of considerable additional computation. Relatively recently, an approach to
            doing data-flow analysis of array elements, called last-write trees (see Section 8.16),
            has been introduced.
                 In most languages, assignments involving direct references to elements of records
            (rather than through pointers) can only use member names that are constants.
            Thus, assignments to records can be treated as either accesses and updates to the
            whole record, as suggested for arrays above, or they can be treated as dealing with
            individual members. The latter approach can result in more effective optimization
            if records are used frequently in a program, and is discussed in Section 12.2. If the
            source language allows variables to be used to select members of records, then they
            are essentially fixed-size arrays with symbolic element names and can be handled
            like other arrays.


8.13        Automating Construction o f Data-Flow
            Analyzers
            Several tools have been implemented that, given a variety of types of intermediate
            code and a description of a data-flow problem, construct a data-flow analyzer that
            solves the given data-flow problem. Such tools can be used to construct data-flow
            analyzers for use in an optimizer, as long as the particular intermediate code is
            used.
                 The first well-known analyzer constructor of this type was developed by Kil-
            dall [Kild73]. His system constructs an iterative analyzer that operates on what he
            calls “ pools,” where a pool is, in current parlance, the data-flow information one has
            at a particular point in a procedure at some time during the analysis. Kildall gives a
            tabular form for expressing pools and rules that, according to the type of flowgraph
            node being processed and the data-flow problem being solved, transforms an “ in­
            put pool” into the corresponding “ output pool.” His system allows for pools to be
            represented as bit vectors, linked lists, or value numbers (see Section 12.4), depend­
            ing on the data-flow problem, and performs a worklist implementation of iterative
            analysis similar to the one presented in Section 8.4.
                 A much more recent and more sophisticated analyzer constructor is Tjiang and
            Hennessy’s Sharlit [TjiH92]. In addition to performing data-flow analyses, it can
            be used to specify optimizing transformations. Much of what one needs to write to
            specify an analyzer and optimizer in Sharlit is purely declarative, but other parts,
260        Data-Flow Analysis


           such as the optimizing transformations, require writing procedural code, which
           one does in C++. This analyzer constructor operates on an intermediate code of
           quadruples called SUIF (see Section C.3.3). The quadruple types of interest to it
           are loads, stores, binary operations that take two operands and place the result in a
           destination, and others that specify control flow. Rather than requiring a data-flow
           analyzer to consist of a local component that analyzes and propagates information
           through basic blocks and a global component that works on the flowgraph of
           basic blocks, Sharlit allows the analyzer specifier to vary the granularity at which
           the compiler writer wishes to work. One can operate on individual intermediate-
           code nodes, or group them into basic blocks, intervals, or other structural units—
           whichever may be most appropriate to the problem at hand.
                The underlying technique used by Sharlit to perform a data-flow analysis is
           path simplification, based on Tarjan’s fast algorithms for path problems, which
           compute a regular expression of node names, called a path expression, that specifies
           all possible execution paths from one node to or through another. For example, for
           the flowgraph in Figure 7.32(a), the path expression for the path from the entry
           through block B5 is

                 entry •(B1 •B2)*»B3»B5

           and the one for the path from B3 through exit is

                 B3 •(B4 + (B5 •(B6 •B7)*)) •exit

           The      operator represents concatenation, “ + ” represents joining of paths, and
              represents repetition. The operators are interpreted in a data-flow analyzer as
           composition of flow functions, meet, and fixed-point computation, respectively.
              To specify an optimizer to Sharlit, one must give the following:

      1.   a description of the flowgraphs it is to operate on (including such choices as whether
           to consider individual quadruples or basic blocks as the units for the analysis);
      2.   the set of data-flow values to be used, one of which is associated with each node
           in the flowgraph in the solution (which may be bit vectors, assignments of constant
           values to variables, or other objects);
      3.   flow functions that describe the effects of nodes on data-flow values; and
      4.   action routines that specify optimizing transformations to be performed using the
           results of the data-flow analysis.

           Given the description of how the data-flow problem being solved interprets the
           flowgraph, values, and functions and a procedure to be analyzed, Sharlit computes
           a set of path expressions for components of a flowgraph, and then uses the flow
           functions and path expressions to compute the flow values constituting the solution.
           It then uses the resulting values and the action routines to traverse the flowgraph
           and perform the applicable transformations.
                Tjiang and Flennessy give three examples of how Sharlit can be used to compute
           available expressions (iterative analysis on a flowgraph of individual nodes, local
           analysis to compute flow functions for basic blocks, and interval analysis). They
            Section 8.14    More Ambitious Analyses                                            261

            conclude that the tool greatly simplifies the specification and debugging of an opti­
            mizer and is competitive in the results it produces with optimizers built by hand for
            commercial compilers.


8.14        More A m bitious A nalyses
            So far we have considered only relatively weak forms of data-flow analysis, which
            give little hint of its power or of its close relationship with such powerful methods
            as proving properties of program s, including correctness. In this section, we explore
            how the complexity of the lattices used and the reasoning power we allow ourselves
            about the operations performed in a program affect the properties we are able to
            determine.
                 Consider doing constant-propagation analysis on the simple example in Fig­
            ure 8.25. If the arithmetic operations, such as the i + 1 that occurs here, are all
            considered to be uninterpreted— i.e., if we assume that we have no information
            about their effect at all— then we have no way of determining whether j ’s value
            is constant at the entry to B4. If, on the other hand, we strengthen our constant-
            propagation analysis to include the ability to do addition of constants, then we can
            easily determine that j has the value 2 on entry to B4.
                 In the example in Figure 8.26, assuming that we can reason about subtraction
            of 1 and comparison to 0 and that we distinguish the “ Y” and “ N” exits from tests,
            then we can conclude that, on entry to the e x i t block, n’s value is < 0. If we extend
            this program to the one shown in Figure 8.27, then we can conclude that n = 0 on
            entry to the e x i t block. Further, if we can reason about integer functions, then we
            can also determine that at the same point, if «o > 0 , f =      where «o represents the
            value of n on entry to the flowgraph. This at least suggests that we can use data­
            flow analytic techniques to do program verification. The data-flow information we
            need to associate with each exit of each block to do so is the inductive assertions
            shown in Table 8.5. While this requires more machinery and has much greater




 FIG. 8.25 Simple example for constant-propagation analysis.
262          Data-Flow Analysis




  FIG. 8.26 Simple factorial computation.




                                                                                  B5


                                                                                  B6


                                                                                  B7




  FIG. 8.27 Full factorial computation.


             computational complexity than any analysis we might actually use in a compiler, it at
             least demonstrates the spectrum of possibilities that data-flow analysis encompasses.
                  Another example of a computationally expensive data-flow analysis, but one
             that is less so than program verification, is type determination and dependence ana­
             lysis of data structures that include records and pointers. This has been investigated
             by a series of researchers starting in 1968 and is a problem for which there are still no
             entirely satisfactory solutions. Various methods have been proposed, but they all fall
             into three major categories, the grammar-based approach and the ^-limited graphs
             defined in a paper of Jones and Muchnick [JonM81a] and the access-path approach
             of Flendren et al. described briefly in Section 9.6.
             Section 8.15      Wrap-Up                                                           263

TABLE 8.5 Inductive assertions associated with the exit from
          each block in Figure 8.27 that are needed to determine
          that it computes the integer factorial function.

             Block          Inductive Assertion

             entry          n = n0
             Bl/Y           n = no < 0
             Bl/N           n = no > 0
             B2             n = 0 and f = hq\
             B3/Y           n = no = 0 and f = 1
             B3/N           n = no > 0
             B4             n = hq = 0 and f = n$\
             B5             n = «o > 0 and f = «o
             B6             n > 0 and f = « 0 x («o - 1) X •' • x (n 1)
             B7/Y           n > 0 and f = «0 x ( « o - 1) X • x ( n + 1 )
             B7/N           n = 0 and f = «o x (wo - 1) X ..•• X 1 = Hq\
             B8             n > 0 and f = no x (no — 1) X •• x n



8.15         Wrap-Up
             Data-flow analysis provides global information about how a procedure (or a larger
             segment of a program) manipulates its data, thus providing grist for the mill of
             optimization. The spectrum of possible data-flow analyses ranges from abstract exe­
             cution of a procedure, which might determine that it computes a particular function,
             to much simpler and easier analyses such as reaching definitions. However, as for
             control-flow analysis, there are three main approaches, one associated with each of
             the control-flow approaches. The approach associated with dominators and back
             edges is called iterative data-flow analysis and the other two approaches have the
             same names as the corresponding control-flow approaches, namely, interval analysis
             and structural analysis. They have trade-offs as to their benefits and disadvantages
             similar to the control-flow approaches as well.
                  No matter which approach we use, we must ensure that the data-flow analysis
             gives us correct and conservative information, i.e., that it does not misrepresent what
             the procedure does by telling us that a transformation is safe to perform that, in fact,
             is not. We guarantee this by careful design of the data-flow equations and by being
             sure that the solution to them that we compute is, if not an exact representation of
             the desired information, at least a conservative approximation to it. For example,
             for reaching definitions, which determine what definitions of variables may reach a
             particular use, the analysis must not tell us that no definitions reach a particular use
             if there are some that may. The analysis is conservative if it gives us a set of reaching
             definitions that is no smaller than if it could produce the minimal result.
                  However, to maximize the benefit that can be derived from optimization, we
             seek to pose data-flow problems that are both conservative and as aggressive as we
264    Data-Flow Analysis


       can make them. Thus, we walk a fine line between being as aggressive as possible
       in the information we compute, and being conservative, so as to get the great­
       est possible benefit from the analyses and transformations performed without ever
       transforming correct code to incorrect code.


8.16   Further Reading
       An example of a text that uses K IL L ( ) functions rather than PRSV( ) is [AhoS8 6 ].
            The lattices used by Jones and Muchnick to describe the “ shapes” of Lisp-like
       data structures are presented in [JonM81b].
            Proof that there may be no algorithm that computes the meet-over-all-paths
       solution for a data-flow analysis involving monotone functions can be found in
       [Ffech77] and [KamU75]. Kildall’s result that for data-flow problems in which all
       the flow functions are distributive, the general iterative algorithm computes the
       MFP solution and that, in that case, the MFP and MOP solutions are identical, is
       found in [Kild73]. Kam and Ullman’s partial generalization to monotone but not
       distributive functions is found in [KamU75].
            Papers that associate data-flow information with edges in the flowgraph in­
       clude [JonM76], [JonM81a], and [Rose81]. The second of those papers also draws
       the distinction between relational and independent attributes.
            Morel and Renvoise’s original formulation of partial-redundancy elimination is
       found in [MorR79] and Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen’s more recent one is given
       in [KnoR92]. Khedker and Dhamdhere [KheD99] discuss the computational com­
       plexity of bidirectional data-flow analysis.
            The approaches to solving data-flow problems in Section 8.3 are described in
       the following papers:
           Approach                                                         Reference

           Allen’s strongly connected region method                        [Alle69]
           Kildall’s iterative algorithm                                   [Kild73]
           Ullman’s T1-T2 analysis                                         [Ullm73]
           Kennedy’s node-listing algorithm                                [Kenn75]
           Farrow, Kennedy, and Zucconi’s graph-grammar approach            [FarK75]
           Elimination methods, e.g., interval analysis                    [A11C76]
           Rosen’s high-level (syntax-directed) approach                   [Rose77]
           Structural analysis                                             [Shar80]
           Slotwise analysis                                               [DhaR92]
            The proof that, if A is the maximal number of back edges on any acyclic path in
       a flowgraph, then A + 2 passes through the re p e at loop in the iterative algorithm
       are sufficient if we use reverse postorder, is due to Hecht and Ullman [HecU75]. Al­
       ternatives for managing the worklist include round-robin and various node listings,
       which are discussed in [Hech77].
            A precursor of slotwise analysis is found in [Kou77]. [DhaR92] shows how to
       apply slotwise analysis to partial-redundancy analysis.
            Static single-assignment form is described in [CytF89] and [CytF91] and is
       derived from an earlier form developed by Shapiro and Saint [ShaS69]. The linear­
             Section 8.17    Exercises                                                        265


             time dominance-frontier algorithm appears in[CytF91], along with efficient methods
             for translating to and from SSA form.
                  The use of last-write trees to do data-flow analysis of array elements is intro­
             duced in [Feau91].
                  Tjiang and Hennessy’s Sharlit is described in [TjiH92] and [Tjia93]. It operates
             on the SUIF intermediate representation, which is described in [TjiW91] (see Appen­
             dix C for information on downloading su if ). [TjiH92] gives three examples of the
             use of Sharlit.
                  Investigation of how to apply data-flow analysis to recursive data structures in­
             cludes [Reyn6 8 ], [Tene74a], [Tene74b], [JonM81a], [Laru89], [Hend90], [ChaW90],
             [HumH94], [Deut94], and a variety of others. The approach used in [HumH94] is
             discussed in Section 9.6.


8.17         Exercises
        8.1 What is the complexity in bit-vector or set operations of iteratively computing
             unidirectional data-flow information using (a) both in( ) and out( ) functions versus
             (b) using only one of them?
        8.2 Give an example of a lattice that is not strongly distributive.
        8.3 Give an example of a specific data-flow problem and an instance for which the MOP
            and MFP solutions are different.
        8.4 Evaluate the space and time complexity of associating data-flow information with
            edges in a flowgraph versus with node entries and exits.
 RSCH 8.5 Formulate the data-flow analysis in Figure 8.4 as a relational problem, as described
          in [JonM81a]. Is the result as good as associating information with edges? What
          about the computational complexity?
 RSCH 8 .6 Research Kennedy’s node-listing algorithm [Kenn75] or Farrow, Kennedy, and Zuc-
           coni’s graph-grammar approach [FarK75] to data-flow analysis. What are their ad­
           vantages and disadvantages in comparison to the methods discussed here?
        8.7 What alternative ways might one use to manage the worklist in Figure 8 .6 ? How do
            they compare in ease of implementation and computational effectiveness to reverse
            postorder for forward problems?
        8.8 Draw the lattice of monotone functions from BV 2 to itself.
  ADV 8.9 Is L f distributive for any L? If not, give an example. If so, prove it.
RSCH 8.10 Research the updating of data-flow information as a flowgraph is being modified, as
          discussed in [Zade84]. What evidence is there that this is worth doing in a compiler,
          rather than recomputing data-flow information when needed?
       8.11 Work an example of structural data-flow analysis on a flowgraph with an improper
             region. Show each of the three approaches to handling the improper region, namely,
             (a) node splitting, (b) iteration, and (c) solving a data-flow problem on the underly­
             ing lattice’s lattice of monotone functions.
266            D ata-Flow Analysis


        8.12 (a) Formulate a backward data-flow analysis using the structural approach, (b) Show
             that the iteration over the function lattice to handle an improper region is a forward
             analysis.
        8.13   (a) Construct an example flowgraph that is a simple loop whose body is an improper
               region that contains an i f - t h e n - e l s e construct, (b) Write the structural data-flow
               equations for your example, (c) Write the ican code to perform a forward data-flow
               analysis for the loop and the i f - t h e n - e l s e . (d) Construct an ican data structure to
               represent the data flow in the improper region as discussed in Section 8.7.3. (e) Write
               an interpreter in ican that evaluates data-flow information using the data structure
               in part (d). (f) Use the code for the loop and the i f - t h e n - e l s e and the interpreter
               for the improper region to compute reaching definitions for the flowgraph.
        8.14 Suggest alternative representations for structural analysis equations (i.e., ones other
             than those shown in Section 8.7.3). What advantages and disadvantages do your
             approaches have?
        8.15   Formulate and solve a BV ” problem, such as available expressions, slotwise.
        8.16 Construct the du-chains, ud-chains, and webs for the procedure in Figure 16.7.
        8.17 Compute D F ( ) and D F + ( ) for the procedure in Figure 16.7.
 RSC H 8.18 Investigate last-write trees [Feau91] for data-flow analysis of arrays. What do they
            provide, allow, and cost?
  ADV 8.19 Does Sharlit produce the M OP solution of a data-flow problem?
                                                                           CHAPTER 9




            Dependence Analysis and
                 Dependence Graphs




      D
               ependence analysis is a vital tool in instruction scheduling (see Section 17.1)
               and data-cache optimization (see Section 20.4).

                      As a tool for instruction scheduling, it determines the ordering rela­
      tionships between instructions in a basic block (or larger unit of code) that must be
      satisfied for the code to execute correctly. This includes determining, for two given
      register or memory references, whether the areas of memory they access overlap and
      whether pairs of instructions have resource conflicts. Similarly, dependence analysis
      and the loop transformations it enables are the main tools for data-cache optimiza­
      tion and are essential to automatic vectorization and parallelization.
            Also, a new intermediate form called the program dependence graph (see Section
      9 .5 ) has been proposed as a basis for doing several sorts of optimizations.
            One of the final sections of this chapter is devoted to dependences between
      dynamically allocated objects.


9.1   Dependence Relations
      In this section, we introduce the basic notions of dependence analysis. Following
      sections show how they are used specifically in instruction scheduling and data-
      cache-related analysis. In each case, we may construct a graph called the dependence
      graph that represents the dependences present in a code fragment—in the case of
      instruction scheduling as applied to a basic block, the graph has no cycles in it, and
      so it is known as the dependence DAG. As we shall see, dependence analysis can be
      applied to code at any level—source, intermediate, or object.
           If statement Si precedes S2 in their given execution order, we write Si < S 2 .
      A dependence between two statements in a program is a relation that constrains
      their execution order. A control dependence is a constraint that arises from the
      control flow of the program, such as S2’s relationship to S3 and S4 in Figure 9.1—
      S3 and S4 are executed only if the condition in S2 is not satisfied. If there is a
                                                                                         267
268              Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


                 SI        a <- b + c
                 S2        if a > 10 goto LI
                 S3           d <- b * e
                 S4           e <- d + 1
                 S5 LI:    d <- e / 2

      FIG. 9.1 Example of control and data dependence in mir code.

                 control dependence between statements Si and S 2 , we write Si 8CS2 . So, S2 Sc S3
                 and S2 <$c S4 in Figure 9.1.
                      A data dependence is a constraint that arises from the flow of data between
                 statements, such as between S3 and S4 in the figure—S3 sets the value of d and
                 S4 uses it; also, S3 uses the value of e and S4 sets it. In both cases, reordering
                 the statements could result in the code’s producing incorrect results. There are four
                 varieties of data dependences, as follows:
            1.   If Si < S 2 and the former sets a value that the latter uses, this is called a flow
                 dependence or true dependence, which is a binary relation denoted Si 8{ S2 ; thus, for
                 example, the flow dependence between S3 and S4 in Figure 9.1 is written S3 S4.
            2.   If Si < S 2 , Si uses some variable’s value, and S2 sets it, then we say that there is an
                 antidependence between them, written Si <$a S 2 . Statements S3 and S4 in Figure 9.1
                 represent an antidependence, S3 8a S4, as well as a flow dependence, since S3 uses e
                 and S4 sets it.
            3.   If Si < S 2 and both statements set the value of some variable, we say there is an
                 output dependence between them, written Si 8° Sj- In the figure, we have S3 8° S5.
            4.   Finally, if Si < S 2 and both statements read the value of some variable, we say there
                 is an input dependence between them, written Si 8l S2 ; for example, in the figure,
                 S3 51 S5, since both read the value of e. Note that an input dependence does not
                 constrain the execution order of the two statements, but it is useful to have this
                 concept in our discussion of scalar replacement of array elements in Section 20.3.
                     A set of dependence relationships may be represented by a directed graph called
                 a dependence graph. In such a graph, the nodes represent statements and the edges
                 represent dependences. Each edge is labeled to indicate the kind of dependence it
                 represents, except that it is traditional to leave flow-dependence edges unlabeled.
                 Figure 9.2 gives the dependence graph for the code in Figure 9.1. Control depen­
                 dences are generally omitted in dependence graphs, unless such a dependence is the




      FIG. 9.2 The dependence graph for the code in Figure 9.1.
           Section 9.2      Basic-Block Dependence DAGs                                         269

           only one that connects two nodes (in our example, there is a control dependence
           connecting S2 and S4, but it is omitted in the graph).


9.2        Basic-Block Dependence DAGs
           The method of basic-block scheduling we consider in Chapter 17 is known as
           list scheduling. It requires that we begin by constructing a dependence graph that
           represents the constraints on the possible schedules of the instructions in a block and
           hence, also, the degrees of freedom in the possible schedules. Since a basic block has
           no loops within it, its dependence graph is always a DAG known as the dependence
           DAG for the block.
                The nodes in a dependence DAG represent machine instructions or low-level
           intermediate-code instructions and its edges represent dependences between the in­
           structions. An edge from to may represent any of several kinds of dependences.
           It may be that
      1.   I 1 writes a register or location that I 2 uses, i.e., I\ 8f I2 ;
      2.   I\ uses a register or location that I2 changes, i.e., /1 8a I2 ;
      3.   I 1 and I2 write to the same register or location, i.e., I\ 8° I 2 ;
      4.   we cannot determine whether I\ can be moved beyond I2 ; or
      5.   I\ and 12 have a structural hazard, as described below.
           The fourth situation occurs, for example, in the case of a load followed by a
           store that uses different registers to address memory, and for which we cannot
           determine whether the addressed locations might overlap. More specifically, suppose
           an instruction reads from [ r l l ] (4) and the next writes to [r2+12] (4 ). Unless we
           know that r2+12 and r l l point to different locations, we must assume that there is
           a dependence between the two instructions.
                The techniques described below in Section 9.4 can be used to disambiguate many
           memory references in loops, and this information can be passed on as annotations
           in the code to increase the freedom available to the scheduler.
                A node I 1 is a predecessor of another node I2 in the dependence DAG if I 2 must
           not execute until Ji has executed for some number of cycles. The type of depen­
           dence represented by an edge in the DAG is unimportant, so we omit the type labels.
           However, the edge from I\ to 12 is labeled with an integer that is the required latency
           between I\ and / 2 , except that we omit labels that are zeros. The latency is the delay
           required between the initiation times of and I2 minus the execution time required
           by /1 before any other instruction can begin executing (usually one cycle, but fre­
           quently zero in a superscalar implementation). Thus, if I 2 can begin execution in the
           cycle following when Ji begins, then the latency is zero, while if two cycles must
           elapse between beginning I 1 and / 2 , then the latency is one. For example, for the l i r
           code in Figure 9.3(a) with the assumption that a load has a latency of one cycle and
           requires two cycles to complete, the dependence DAG is as shown in Figure 9.3(b).
                Condition codes and other implicit resources are treated as if they were registers
           for the computation of dependences.
270             Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs



                1      r2     [rl] (4)
                2      r3 <- [rl+4] (4)
                3      r4 •*- r2 + r3
                4      r5     r2 - 1
                                                    ©           ©
                (a)                                 (b)
      FIG. 9.3 (a) A basic block of lir code, and (b) its dependence DAG.




                1     r3 <- [rl5] (4)
                2     r4 <- [rl5+4] (4)
                3     r2 <- r3 - r4
                4     r5 «- [rl2] (4)
                5     rl2 <-• rl2 + 4
                6     r6 <- r3 * r5
                7     [r!5+4] (4)     r3
                8     r5 <- r6 + 2




                (a)
      FIG. 9.4 (a) A more complex lir example, and (b) its dependence DAG.


                     As a second, more complex example, consider the lir code in Figure 9.4(a) and
                its dependence DAG in Figure 9.4(b), again assuming a latency of one cycle for loads.
                Instructions 1 and 2 are independent of each other since they reference different
                memory addresses and different target registers. Instruction 3 must follow both of
                them because it uses the values loaded by both of them. Instruction 4 is independent
                of 1 and 2 because they are all loads to different registers. Instruction 7 must follow
                1, 2, and 4 because it uses the result of 1, stores into the address loaded from by 2,
                and would conflict with 4 if the value in r l2 is rl5 + 4 .
                     Note that the edge from 4 to 8 in Figure 9.4(b) is redundant, since there is an
                edge from 4 to 6 and another from 6 to 8. On the other hand, if the edge from 4 to
                8 were labeled with a latency of 4, it would not be redundant since then

                      1 ,2 ,4 ,5 ,6 , 7 ,8 ,3

                and

                      1 ,2 ,4 , 5, 6, 8, 7, 3
Section 9.2           Basic-Block Dependence DAGs                                              271


would both be feasible schedules, but the first would require eight cycles, while the
second would require nine.
    To construct the dependence DAG for a basic block we need two functions,

      Latency: L IR In st x in te g e r x LIR In st x in te g e r —> in te g e r

and

      C o n f lic t : L IR In st x L IR In st — > b o o lean

defined by

      Latency U \ ,« i ,/2>w2) = the number of latency cycles incurred by beginning
                                 execution of I 2 s n ^ cycle while executing
                                 cycle n\ of I\

and

      C o n f lic t ( / 1 , 12 ) =
                                     tru e     if I 1 must precede I 2 for correct execution
                                     fa lse    otherwise

Note that for any two l ir instructions I\ and I 2 separated by a .sequence pseudo­
op, C o n flic t ( / 1 , J 2 ) is tru e.
     To compute Latency ( ), we use resource vectors. A reso u rc e v ec to r for an
instruction is an array of sets of computational resources such that the instruction
needs the given resources in successive cycles of its execution. For example, the m ip s
R4000 floating-point unit has seven resources named A (mantissa Add), E (Exception
test), M (Multiplier first stage), N (Multiplier second stage), R (adder Round), S
(operand Shift), and U (Unpack). The single-precision floating-point add (ad d.s)
and multiply (mul. s) instructions have the following resource vectors:

                      1        2        3        4        5      6        7
      a d d .s        u        S,A      A ,R     R ,S
      m u l. s        u        M        M        M        N      N ,A     R

so starting an add. s in cycle four of a mul. s would result in conflicts in the sixth and
seventh cycles of the mul. s —in the sixth, both instructions need resource A, and in
the seventh, both need R. Competition by two or more instructions for a resource at
the same time is called a stru c tu ra l h a z a r d .
       Now, to compute L aten cy (Ji , J 2 ), we match the resource vector for instruction
I 1 with that for I 2 (see Figure 9.5). In particular, we repeatedly check whether
elements of the two resource vectors have a non-empty intersection, stepping along
J i ’s resource vector each time we find a resource conflict. The procedure Inst_RV( )
takes an instruction as its first argument and the length of the resource vector
as its second and returns the resource vector corresponding to the type of that
instruction. The function R esSet (m s*,*) returns the set of resources used by cycle
i of instruction in st. The constant MaxCycles is the maximum number of cycles
needed by any instruction.
272               Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


                      ResVec = array [1•-MaxCycles] of set of Resource
                      MaxCycles, IssueLatency: integer

                      procedure Latency(instl,cycl,inst2,cyc2) returns integer
                         instl, inst2: in LIRInst
                         cycl, cyc2: in integer
                      begin
                         I1RV, I2RV: ResVec
                         n := MaxCycles, i := 0, j, k: integer
                         cycle: boolean
                         I1RV := Inst_RV(instl,cycl)
                         I2RV := Inst_RV(inst2,cyc2)
                         II determine cycle of instl at which inst2 can begin
                         I| executing without encountering stalls
                         repeat
                            cycle := false
                             j := 1
                             while j < n do
                                if IlRV[j] n I2RV[j] * 0 then
                                   for k := 1 to n - 1 do
                                      IlRVCk] := IlRV[k+l]
                                   od
                                   n -= 1
                                   i +- 1
                                   cycle := true
                                   goto LI
                                fi
                                j += 1
                             od
                  LI:    until !cycle
                          return i
                      end     II Latency

                      procedure Inst_RV(inst,cyc) returns ResVec
                          inst: in LIRInst
                          eye: in integer
                      begin
                          IRV: ResVec
                          i : integer
                          I| construct resource vector for latency computation
                          I| from resource set
                          for i := 1 to MaxCycles do
                               if cyc+i-1 < MaxCycles then
                                    IRV[i] := ResSet(inst,cyc+i-1)
                               else
                                    IRV[i] := 0
                               fi
                          od
                          return IRV
                      end      II Inst_RV

      FIG . 9.5   Computing the L aten cy ( ) function.
Section 9.2      Basic-Block Dependence DAGs                                                     273


     For the example L a te n c y (m u l.s,4 ,a d d .s, 1), we have MaxCycles = 7 and the
following resource vectors:

     I1RV[1] = {M}             I2RV[1] = m
     I1RV[2] = m               I2RV[2] = {S,A>
     I1RV[3] = {N,A>           I2RV[3] = {A,R>
     I1RV[4] = {R>             I2RV[4] = {R,S>
     11RV [5] = 0              I2RV [5] = 0
     I1RV[6] = 0               I2RV [6] = 0
     I1RV[7] = 0               I2RV[7] = 0

The reader can easily check that the call to Latency ( ) returns the value 2, so
starting the add. s immediately would result in a two-cycle stall,1 but the ad d .s can
be started in cycle 6 of the mul. s with no stall cycles.
     While this method of computing latency is transparent, it can be computed
significantly more quickly. Proebsting and Fraser [ProF94] describe a method that
uses a deterministic finite automaton whose states are similar to sets of resource
vectors and whose transitions are instructions to compute the analogue of the j loop
in our algorithm by a single table lookup.
     Now let I n s t [ l* * r a ] be the sequence of instructions (including .sequence
pseudo-ops) that make up a basic block. If the basic block ends with a branch and
if branches have a delay slot in the architecture, we exclude the branch from the
sequence of instructions. The data structure DAG has the form shown in Figure 9.6,
where Nodes = { 1 , . . ., n> and Roots £ Nodes.
     The algorithm to construct the scheduling DAG is called Build_DAG( ) and is
given in Figure 9.6. The algorithm iterates over the instructions in order. It first
determines, for each instruction, whether it conflicts with any of the ones already
in the DAG. If so, the instructions it conflicts with are put into the set Conf. Then, if
Conf is empty, the current instruction is added to Roots, the set of roots of the DAG.
Otherwise, for each instruction in Conf, a new edge is added to the graph from it to
the new instruction and the label associated with the edge is set to the corresponding
latency. Constructing the DAG requires 0 ( n 2) operations, since it compares each
pair of instructions in the basic block to find the dependences.
     As an example of the DAG-building process, consider the sequence of eight lir
instructions given in Figure 9.4(a). Build_DAG( ) is called with n = 8 and In st [1]
through In st [8] set to the eight instructions in sequence. For the first instruction,
there are no previous instructions to conflict with, so it is made a root. The second
instruction does not conflict with the first, so it is also made a root. The third
instruction conflicts with both the first and second, since it uses the values loaded by
them, so edges are added to the DAG running from the first and second instructions
to the third, each with a latency of one. The fourth instruction does not conflict with
any of its predecessors—it might be the case that [r!2 ] (4) is the same address as


1. A stall refers to the inaction (or “stalling” ) of a pipeline when it cannot proceed to execute
the next instruction presented to it because a needed hardware resource is in use or because some
condition it uses has not yet been satisfied. For example, a load instruction may stall for a cycle in
some implementations if the quantity loaded is used by the next instruction.
274             Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


                DAG * record {
                        Nodes, Roots: set of integer,
                        Edges: set of (integer x integer),
                        Label: (integer x integer) — > integer}

                procedure Build_DAG(m,Inst) returns DAG
                   m: in integer
                    Inst: in array [l-*m] of LIRInst
                begin
                   D :- <Nodes:0,Edges:0,Label:0,Roots:0>: DAG
                    Conf: set of integer
                    j, k: integer
                    I| determine nodes, edges, labels, and
                    || roots of a basic-block scheduling DAG
                    for j := 1 to m do
                       D.Nodes u= {j}
                       Conf := 0
                       for k := 1 to j - 1 do
                           if Conflict(Inst[k],Inst[j]) then
                              Conf u= {k}
                           fi
                       od
                       if Conf = 0 then
                           D.Roots u= {j}
                       else
                           for each k e Conf do
                              D.Edges u= {k->j}
                              D.Label(k,j) := Latency(Inst[k],1,Inst[j],IssueLatency+1)
                           od
                       fi
                    od
                   return D
                end      II Build.DAG

      FIG. 9.6 Algorithm to construct the dependence DAG for basic-block scheduling.


                 [r l5 ] (4) or [rl5 + 4 ] (4 ), but since they are all loads and there are no intervening
                stores to any of the locations, they don’t conflict. The DAG that results from this
                process is the one shown in Figure 9.4(b).


9.3             Dependences
                In studying data-cache optimization, our concern is almost entirely with data depen­
                dence, not control dependence.
                     While dependences among scalar variables in a single basic block are useful for
                instruction scheduling and as an introduction to the concepts, our next concern
                is dependences among statements that involve subscripted variables nested inside
                loops. In particular, we consider uses of subscripted variables in perfectly nested
          Section 9.3        Dependences in Loops                                                         275

          for il <- 1 to nl do
             for i2 < - 1 to n2 do

                        for ik <- 1 to nk do
                           sta te m e n ts
                        endfor

             endfor
          endfor
FIG. 9.7 A canonical loop nest.

          loops in h i r that are expressed in canonical form, i.e., each loop’s index runs from
          1 to some value n by Is and only the innermost loop has statements other than f o r
          statements within it.
               The iteration space of the loop nest in Figure 9.7 is the ^-dimensional polyhe­
          dron consisting of all the ^-tuples of values of the loop indexes (called index vectors),
          which is easily seen to be the product of the index ranges of the loops, namely,

               [l..nl] x [l..n2] x . . . x [l..nk]
          where [a..b] denotes the sequence of integers from a through b and n l, . . . , nk are
          the maximum values of the iteration variables.
              We use “ V ’ to denote the lexicographic ordering of index vectors. Thus,

               (zTi,. . . , ik\) < { H i,. . . , iki)
          if and only if

               3/, 1 < / < k, such that il \ = / I 2 , . . . , /(/ — l) i = i(j — 1)2 and ij\ < iji
          and, in particular, 0 -< ( / l , . . . , ik), i.e., 7 is lexicographically positive, if

               3/, 1 < / < k, such that il = 0 , . . . , /(/ — 1) = 0 and ij > 0
          Note that iteration {il j , . . . , ik 1 ) of a loop nest precedes iteration (/I 2 , . . . , ik2 ) if
          and only if

               (z'li,. . . , z&i) -< (zl2, . . . , iki)
               The iteration-space traversal of a loop nest is the sequence of vectors of in­
          dex values encountered in executing the loops, i.e., the lexicographic enumeration
          of the index vectors. We represent the traversal graphically by a layout of nodes
          corresponding to the index vectors with dashed arrows between them indicating
          the traversal order. For example, for the loop in Figure 9.8, the iteration space is
          [1..3] x [1..4] and the iteration-space traversal is portrayed in Figure 9.9.
               Note that the iteration space of a loop nest need not be rectangular. In particular,
          the loop nest in Figure 9.10 has the trapezoidal iteration space and traversal shown
          in Figure 9.11.
               Given subscripted variables nested in loops, the dependence relations are more
          complicated than for scalar variables: the dependences are functions of the index
276              Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


                        for il <- 1 to 3 do
                           for i2 <- 1 to 4 do
                 51            t <- x + y
                 52            a[il,i2] <- b[il,i2] + c[il,i2]
                 53            b[il,i2] <- a[il,i2-l] * d[il+l,i2] + t
                           endfor
                        endfor

      FIG. 9.8 An example of a doubly nested loop.


                                                   i2

                              1     2                     3             4
                        > 0       - - K      >     - 0    - - ; ! 0



                 ii     2                        ------ K > — ; : ? 0



                        3   O ^ - — ► Q - -----► Q - ------ h O

      FIG. 9.9 The iteration-space traversal for the code in Figure 9.8.


                        for il <- 1 to 3 do
                           for i2 <- 1 to il+1 do
                 51            a[il,i2] <- b[il,i2] + c[il,i2]
                 52            b[il,i2] <- a[il,i2-l]
                           endfor
                        endfor

  FIG. 9.10 A doubly nested loop with a nonrectangular iteration-space traversal.

                 variables, as well as of the statements. We use bracketed subscripts after a statement
                 number to indicate the values of the index variables. We extend the “ <T notation so
                 that              . . . , iki] <S2[/l2> • • • j ^ 2 ] means that S i [ / l i , . . . , ik\] is executed before
                 S 2 UI2 , . . . , ik2 ], where il through ik are the loop indexes of the loops containing the
                 statements Si and S2 , outermost first. Note that S i [ / l i , . . . , ik 1] < S2 DT2 , . . . , ik2 ] if
                 and only if either Si precedes S 2 in the program and ( / I i , . . . , ik 1) < (iI 2 , . . . , ik2 )
                 or Si is the same statement as or follows S2 and ( / l i , . . . , ik 1 ) (/I 2 , . . . , ik2 ).
                      For our example in Figure 9.8, we have the following execution-order relation­
                 ships:

                      S2[il, i 2 -l] < S3[il, i 2 ]
                      S2[il, 1 2 ] < S3[il, 1 2 ]
            Section 9.3        Dependences in Loops                                                277

                                              ±2
                      1        2                        3   4

                  *o---»p
            u 2cP-—>o—
                     —>o
                  3                        -----► O------► O
FIG. 9.11 The trapezoidal iteration-space traversal of the loop nest in Figure 9.10.


                                              i2

                      1        2                        3   4

                  i O-------HD------ O ------O

            ii 2 o------ KD------KD----- hO

                  3O-------HD------ hO------O
FIG. 9.12 The dependence relations for the code in Figure 9.8.


            and the corresponding dependence relations:

                S 2 [ il, i 2 —1] <5f S 3 [ il , i2 ]
                S 2 [ il, i2] <$a S 3 [ il, i2]

            Like the iteration-space traversal, the dependence relations for the loop body as
            a whole can be displayed graphically, as shown in Figure 9.12. We omit arrows
            that represent self-dependences. Note that each ( i l , 1) iteration uses the value of
            a [ i l ,0 ] , but that this is not represented in the diagram, since 0 is not a legal value
            for the loop index i2 .
                   Next we introduce distance, direction, and dependence vectors as notations for
            loop-based dependences. A distance vector for a nest of k loops is a ^-dimensional
            vector d = {d\ 9. . . , d*), where each dj is an jnteger; it means that for each index
            vector 7, the iteration with index vector 1 4- d — (i\ + d \ 9. . . ,    + d^) depends on
            the one with index vector 7. A direction vector approximates one or more distance
278   Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


      vectors and has elements that are ranges of integers, where each range is [0, 0],
      [1, oo], [—oo, —1], or [—oo, oo], or the union of two or more ranges. There are two
      frequently occurring notations for direction vectors, as follows:

          [0,0]      [l,o o]     [ - 0 0 ,- 1 ]   [—oo, oo]
          =          +           -                ±
          =          <           >                *

      In the second notation, the symbols           “ < ” , and “ > ” are used for unions of
      ranges, with the obvious meanings. So the dependences described above for the loop
      nest in Figure 9.8 are represented by the distance vectors

          S 2 [il, ±2-1] (0,1) S 3 [il, i2]
          S 2 [il, i2] (0,0) S 3 [il, i2]

      which can be summarized (with significant loss of information) by the direction
      vector (= , <).
           Dependence vectors generalize the other two kinds of vectors. A dependence
      vector for a nest of k loops is a ^-dimensional vector d = ([dj~, d * ] , . . . , [d d ^ ] ) 9
      where each [ d j, d f ] is a (possibly infinite) range of integers and infinite values
      satisfying d^~ e Z U {—oo}, d f e Z U {oo}, and d~ < d f . Note that a dependence
      vector corresponds to a (possibly infinite) set of distance vectors called its distance
      vector set D V(d), as follows:

          D V {d) = {(<zi,. . . , a^) I ai e Z and di < a; < d^]

      If d~ = d f for 1 < i < k , then the dependence vector is a distance vector. Conven­
      tionally, we write such single values in place of their ranges. As above, the ranges
      [1, oo], [—oo, —1], and [—oo, oo] correspond to the directions “ + ” or “ < ” ,      ” or
      “ > ” , and “ ± ” or
           The dependences for the loop nest in Figure 9.8 can now be represented by the
      dependence vector (0, [0,1]).
           Note that dependences with distance (0, 0 , . . . , 0) have no effect on loop trans­
      formations that avoid reordering the statements in the body of a loop. Accordingly,
      we may omit mentioning such dependences.
           Further, a dependence may be loop-independent, i.e., independent of the loops
      surrounding it, or loop-carried, i.e., present because of the loops around it. In
      Figure 9.8, the dependence of S3 on S2 arising from the use of b [ i l , i 2 ] in S2
      and its definition in S3 is loop-independent—even if there were no loops around the
      statements, the antidependence would still be valid. In contrast, the flow dependence
      of S2 on S3, arising from S2’s setting an element of a [ ] and S3’s use of it one
      iteration of the i2 loop later, is loop-carried and, in particular, carried by the inner
      loop; removing the outer loop would make no difference in this dependence. A loop-
      independent dependence is denoted by a subscript zero attached to the dependence
      symbol and a dependence carried by loop i (counting outward) by a subscript i > 1.
      Thus, for example, for the dependences in Figure 9.8, we have
           Section 9.4        Dependence Testing                                             279
                 for i <- 1 to n do
                    for j <- 1 to n do
           SI              a[i,j] <- (a[i-l,j] + a[i+l,j])/2.0
                    endfor
                 endfor

FIG. 9.13 An assignment SI with the distance vector (1,0).

                 S2[il,i2-l]s{ S3[il,i2]
                 S2[il, i2]<5g S3[il, i 2 ]
           or in the distance vector notation:
                 S2 [ i l , i 2 - 1 ] (0 , l)i S3[il,i2]
                 S2[il,i2] (0, 0>0 S3 [ i l , i 2 ]
           These concepts are useful in doing scalar replacement of array elements (Sec­
           tion 20.3).
               As another example, the assignment in Figure 9.13 has the distance vector <1,0)
           and is carried by the outer loop, i.e.,
                 S l[ i l- 1 , j] (l,0)i S I[il, j]

.4         Dependence Testing
           In Section 20.4, we are concerned with transforming loop nests to take better
           advantage of the memory hierarchy. Most of the transformations we consider there
           are applicable only if there are no dependences (of particular kinds, depending on
           the transformation) between iterations of a loop nest. Thus, it is essential to be able
           to determine whether there are dependences present in a loop nest and, if so, what
           they are.
                Consider the example loop in Figure 9.14(a). To determine whether there are
           any dependences between references to a [ ] in the same iteration, we must determine
           whether there exists an integer i that satisfies the equation
                 2 * / + 1 = 3 * / —5
           and the inequality 1 < / < 4. The equation is easily seen to hold if and only if i = 6,
           and this value of i does not satisfy the inequality, so there are no same-iteration
           dependences (i.e., dependences with distance 0) in this loop.


           for i <- 1 to 4 do                              for i * - 1 to 4 do
              b[i]    a[3*i-5] + 2.0                          b[i] •«- a[4*i] + 2.0
              a[2*i+l] <- 1.0/i                               a[2*i+l] * - 1.0/i
           endfor                                          endfor
           (a)                                             (b)
FIG. 9.14 Two example hir loops for dependence testing.
280   Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


           To determine whether there are any dependences between references to a [ ] in
      different iterations, we seek integers i\ and z’2 that satisfy the equation
          2   * z'i +   1 =   3 * *2 — 5


      and that both satisfy the given inequality. Again, we can easily determine that for
      any z, i\ = 3 * z and z*2 = 2 * z + 2 satisfy the equation, and for z = 1, we get i\ = 3
      and z’2 = 4, both of which satisfy the inequality. Thus, there is a dependence with
      positive distance in the loop: a [7] is used in iteration 3 and set in iteration 4.
          Notice that if the loop limits were nonconstant expressions, we would not be
      able to conclude that there was no dependence with distance 0—we could only
      conclude that there might be a dependence with distance 0 or a positive distance,
      since the inequality would no longer be applicable.
          Next, suppose we change the first statement in the loop to fetch a [ 4 * i ] , as in
      Figure 9.14(b). Now we must satisfy the equation

          2 * z’i + 1 = 4 * z*2

      either for the same or different integer values of i\ and z-2 and the same inequality
      as above, as well. It is easy to see that this is not possible, regardless of satisfying
      the inequality—the left-hand side of the equation is odd for any value of z'i, while
      the right-hand side is even for any value of z*2 . Thus there are no dependences in the
      second loop, regardless of the values of the loop bounds.
            In general, testing whether there are dependences present in a loop nest and, if
      so, what they are is a problem in constrained Diophantine equations—i.e., solving
      one or more equations with integer coefficients for integer solutions that also satisfy
      given inequalities, which is equivalent to integer programming, a problem that is
      known to be NP-complete. However, almost all subscript expressions occurring in
      real programs are very simple.
            In particular, the subscripts are almost always linear expressions of the loop
      indexes, and, from this point on, we assume that this is the case. Often the subscripts
      are linear expressions in a single index. Accordingly, we assume that we are given a
      loop nest of the form shown in Figure 9.15 with n loops indexed by the variables i\
      through in and two references to elements of the array x [ ] with subscripts that are
      all linear expressions in the loop indexes. There is a dependence present if and only
      if for each subscript position the equation
                  n                        n

          #o +          ai * V*1= ^ 0 +          * */>2
                 7=1                       7=1

      and the inequalities

          1 < //, 1 < bij and 1 < iu2 < hij for j = 1 , . . . , n

      are jointly satisfied. Of course, the type of dependence is determined by whether
      each instance of x [. . . ] is a use or a definition. There are numerous methods in use
      for testing for dependence or independence. We describe several in detail and give
      references for a list of others.
           Section 9.4          Dependence Testing                                                          281


           for i\ <- 1 to h i\ do
              for i2 <- 1 to h ii do

                         for in        1 to bin do

                               ••• x [...,a0 + a \ * i\ -\---- h an * in, ••J

                               ••• x[.    bo + b \ * i\ H---- \ - bn *i „, ..J •••

                         endfor

              endfor
           endfor

FIG. 9.15 Form of the hir loop nest assumed for dependence testing.

                The earliest test currently in use is known as the GCD (greatest common divisor)
           test and was developed by Banerjee [Bane76] and Towle [Towl76]. It is a compara­
           tively weak test in terms of its ability to prove independence. The GCD test states
           that if, for at least one subscript position,


                gcd      ( J sep (ahbhj) ) /             (a, - b,)
                      V =1                  /     I= °

                           )
           where gcd( is the greatest common divisor function, “a                    / b” means a does not
           divide fe, and sep(^, b9j) is defined by2
                    / i \        \ {& ~ b}       if direction / is =
                X ? ia ’ b- ') = \ M             otherwise
           then the two references to x [. .. ] are independent; or equivalently, if there is a
           dependence, then the GCD divides the sum. For example, for our loop in Fig­
           ure 9.14(a), the test for a same-iteration dependence reduces to

                gcd(3 - 2) / ( - 5 - 1 + 3 - 2 )
           or 1 / —5, which is false, and so tells us only that there may be a dependence.
           Similarly, for inter-iteration dependence, we have

                gcd(3,2) / (—5 — 1 + 3 —2)

           or again 1 / —5, which again fails to rule out independence. For the example in
           Figure 9.14(b), on the other hand, we have

                gcd (4, 2 ) / ( - 1 + 4 - 2 )

           which reduces to 2 / 1. Since this is true, these two array references are independent.

           2. Note that since gcd (a, b) = gcd (a, a - b) = gcd(b, a - b) for all a and b , the unequal direction
           case includes the equal direction case.
282        Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs


               The GCD test can be generalized to arbitrary lower loop bounds and loop
           increments. To do so, assume the /th loop control is

                fo r           by incj to hij

           Then the GCD test states that if, for at least one subscript position,


                gcd I ( J seP(*/' * inci> bj * incj, /) I / a 0 - b0 +     (*/ - bj) * /o,
                    \/=i                               /               /=i
           then the two instances of x [. . . ] are independent.
                 Two important classes of array references are the separable and weakly separa­
           ble ones, which are found to occur almost to the exclusion of others in a very wide
           range of real programs. A pair of array references is separable if in each pair of sub­
           script positions the expressions found are of the form a * ij + b\ and a * ij + b2 where
           if is a loop control variable and a , b\, and b2 are constants. A pair of array references
           is weakly separable if each pair of subscript expressions is of the form a\ * ij + b\
           and a2 * ij + b2 where ij is as above and       a 2, b\, and b2 are constants. Both of our
           examples in Figure 9.14 are weakly separable but not separable.
                 For a separable pair of array references, testing dependence is trivial: a depen­
           dence exists if either of two situations holds for each subscript position, namely,
      1.   a = 0 and b\ — b2, or
      2.   (b\ - b2)/a < hij.
               For a weakly separable pair of array references, we have for each subscript
           position / a linear equation of the form

                a\ * y + b\ = a i * x + bi

           or

                ai * y = a i * x + 0 2 —b\)

           and there is a dependence between the two references if each set of equations for a
           particular value of / has a solution that satisfies the inequality given by the bounds
           of loop /. Now we appeal to the theory of linear equations and divide the problem
           into cases, as follows (in each case, the solutions represent dependences if and only
           if they satisfy the bounds inequalities):
            (a) If the set of equations has one member, assume it is as given above. Then we
                have one linear equation in two unknowns and there are integer solutions if and
                only if gcd(a 1, a 2) \ (b2 - b\).
           (b) If the set of equations has two members, say,

                       a hi * y = d2,i * * + 0 2 ,1 - b^i)
                and

                       * 1,2 * y = *2,2 * X + 0 2 ,2 - &1,2 )
            Section 9.4        Dependence Testing                                                     283

            for i <- 1 to n do
               for j <- 1 to n do
                  f[i] <- g[2*i,j] + 1.0
                  g[i+l,3*j]    h[i,i] - 1.5
                  h[i+2,2*i-2] <- 1.0/i
               endfor
            endfor

FIG. 9.16 An example of weak separability.


                then it is a system of two equations in two unknowns. If <Z2,i/<zi,i = 02 ,2 /^ 1,25
                there are rational solutions if and only if

                      0 2 ,1   -           = 0 2 ,2 - &1,2 ) / * 1,2
                and the solutions are easily enumerated. If 0 2 ,1 / 01,1 ^ 02,l ! a \,2? then there is one
                rational solution, and it is easily determined. In either case, we check that the
                solutions are integers and that the required inequalities are also satisfied.
            (c) If the set of equations has n > 2 members, then either n —2 equations are
                redundant and this case reduces to the preceding one or it is a system of at least
                three equations in two unknowns and is overdetermined.
                     As an example of weak separability, consider the loop nest in Figure 9.16.
                We first consider the g [ ] references. For there to be a dependence, we must
                have for the first subscript

                      2 * x = y +1

                and for the second

                      z= 3*w

                The two equations are independent of each other and each has an infinite
                number of integer solutions. In particular, there are dependences between the
                array references as long as n > 3. For the h[ ] references, we must satisfy

                      x= y+ 2

                and

                      x = 2 * y —2

                simultaneously. This is easily seen to be true if and only if x = 6 and y = 4, so
                there is a dependence if and only if n > 6.
                As indicated above, there are numerous other dependence tests available with
            varying power and computational complexity (see Section 9.8 for further reading).
            These include:
       1.   the extended GCD test,
       2.   the strong and weak SIV (single index variable) tests,
284        Dependence Analysis and Dependence G raphs


      3.   the Delta test,
      4.   the Acyclic test,
      5.   the Power test,
      6.   the Simple Loop Residue test,
      7.   the Fourier-Motzkin test,
      8.   the Constraint-M atrix test, and
      9.   the Omega test.


9.5        Program -D ependence Graphs
           Program-dependence graphs, or PDGs, are an intermediate-code form designed
           for use in optimization. The PDG for a program consists of a control-dependence
           graph (CD G)3 and a data-dependence graph. Nodes in a PDG may be basic blocks,
           statements, individual operators, or constructs at some in-between level. The data-
           dependence graph is as described above in Sections 9.1 and 9.3.
                  The CDG , in its most basic form, is a DAG that has program predicates (or, if
           the nodes are basic blocks, blocks that end with predicates) as its root and internal
           nodes, and nonpredicates as its leaves. A leaf is executed during the execution of the
           program if the predicates on the path leading to it in the control-dependence graph
           are satisfied.
                  M ore specifically, let G = (N , E ) be a flowgraph for a procedure. Recall that a
           node m postdominates node « , written m pdom n, if and only if every path from n to
           e x i t passes through m (see Section 7.3). Then node n is control-dependent on node
           m if and only if
      1.   there exists a control-flow path from m to n such that every node in the path other
           than m is postdominated by n and
      2.   n does not postdominate m.4
               To construct the CDG , we first construct the basic CDG and then add so-called
           region nodes to it. To construct the basic CDG , we begin by adding a dummy
           predicate node called s t a r t to the flowgraph with its “ Y” edge running to the en try
           node and its “ N” edge to e x i t . Call the resulting graph G + . Next, we construct the
           postdominance relation on G + ,5 which can be displayed as a tree, and we define S
           to be the set of edges m ^>n in G + such that n does not postdominate m. Now for


           3. [Fer087] defines two notions of the control-dependence graph, the one we discuss here (called
           by the authors the e x a c t C D G ) and the a p p r o x im a te C D G , which shows the same dependences
           as the exact CDG for well-structured programs and from which it is somewhat easier to generate
           sequential code.
           4. Note that this notion of control dependence is a subrelation of the one discussed in Section 9.1.
           5. This can be done by reversing the edges in the flowgraph and using either of the dominator-
           computation algorithms in Section 7.3.
            Section 9.5   Program-Dependence Graphs                                           285




FIG. 9.17 Flowgraph from Figure 7.4 with s t a r t node added.



                          exit


                                          B1



                                         entry


                            B3      B6

FIG. 9.18 Postdominance tree for the flowgraph in Figure 9.17.


           each edge m^>n e S, we determine the lowest common ancestor of m and n in the
           postdominance tree (or m itself if it is the root). The resulting node / is either m or
           ra’s parent, and all nodes in N on the path from / to n in the postdominance tree
           except / are control-dependent on m.
                For example, consider the flowgraph shown in Figure 7.4. The result of adding
           the s t a r t node is Figure 9.17 and its postdominance tree is shown in Figure 9.18.
           The set S consists of sta rt-G e n try , B1->B2, B1->B3, and B4->B6, and the basic
           CDG is as shown in Figure 9.19.
                The purpose of region nodes is to group together all the nodes that have the
           same control dependence on a particular predicate node, giving each predicate node
           at most two successors, as in the original control-flow graph. The result of adding
           region nodes to our example is shown in Figure 9.20.
286           Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs

                                start
                                Y|
                                 B1




                           Y
                           B6

  FIG. 9.19 Basic control-dependence graph for the flowgraph in Figure 9.17.


                                start
                                Y|
                                 B1
                            N           Y

                                            R2



                                            B2


                     Yi
                       i

                      R3



                      B6

  FIG. 9.20 Control-dependence graph with region nodes for the flowgraph in Figure 9.17.


                  An important property of PDGs is that nodes control-dependent on the same
              node, such as B3 and B5 in our example, can be executed in parallel as long as there
              are no data dependences between them.
                  Several other intermediate-code forms with goals similar to those of the program-
              dependence graph have been suggested in the literature. These include the depen­
              dence flowgraph, the program-dependence web, and the value-dependence graph.


9.6           Dependences Between Dynamically Allocated
              Objects
              So far we have discussed dependences between machine instructions and between
              array accesses, plus the program-dependence graph. Another area of concern is large
              dynamically allocated data structures linked by pointers, e.g., lists, trees, DAGs,
              and other graph structures that are used in both algebraic and symbolic languages,
           Section 9.6    Dependences Between Dynamically Allocated Objects                   287

           such as l isp , Prolog, and Smalltalk. If we can determine that such a data structure
           or graph is, for example, a linked list, a tree, or a DAG, or that parts of it are never
           shared (i.e., accessible from two variables at once through a chain of pointers), we
           may be able to improve memory or cache allocation for it, just as for arrays.
                  Some of the pioneering work in this area was done in the mid 1970s by Tenen-
           baum and by Jones and Muchnick, designed largely as an attempt to assign data
           types to variables in a language in which only data objects have types a priori; there
           has been a flurry of research activity in recent years. More recent papers by Deutsch
           and by Hummel, Hendren, and Nicolau present approaches with impressive results,
           but these approaches require large amounts of computational effort to obtain their
           results. (See Section 9.8 for further reading.)
                  We describe briefly a technique developed by Hummel, Hendren, and Nicolau.
           What it does consists of three parts, namely, (1) it develops a naming scheme for
           anonymous locations in heap memory by describing the relationships between such
           locations; (2) it develops axioms that characterize the basic aliasing relations among
           locations and/or the lack thereof in the data structures; and (3) it uses a theorem
           prover to establish desired properties of the structures, such as that a particular
           structure is a queue expressed as a linked list with items added at one end and
           removed from the other.
                  The naming scheme uses the names of fixed locations and fields in records to
           specify relationships. Specifically it uses handles, which name fixed nodes (usually
           pointer variables) in a structure and have the form _hvar where var is a variable
           name, and access-path matrices, which express relationships between handles and
           variables. Thus, for the C type declaration in Figure 9.21(a) and some particular
           programs, the axioms in (b) might be applicable. The third axiom, for example, says
           that any location reachable from a pointer variable p by one or more accesses of
           l e f t or r ig h t components is distinct from the location denoted by p itself.
                  Figure 9.22 shows a C function that uses the data type defined in Figure 9.21(a)
           and that satisfies the given axioms. An access-path matrix for the program point


           typedef struct node {struct node *left;
                                struct node *right;
                                int val> node;
            (a)

           Axl: Vp p.left * p.right
           Ax2: Vp,q p * q => p.left * q.left,
                              p.left * q.right,
                              p.right * q.left,
                              p.right * q.right
           Ax3: Vp p(.left|.right)+ * p.€
            (b)
FIG. 9.21 (a) Example of a C type declaration for a recursive data structure, and (b) axioms that
          apply to structures built from it.
288           Dependence A nalysis and Dependence Graphs


              typedef struct node {struct node *left;
                                   struct node *right;
                                   int val} node;

              int follow(ptr,i,j)
                 struct node *ptr;
                 int i, j;
              { struct node *pl, *p2;
                 int n;
                 pi = ptr;
                 p2 = ptr;
                 for (n * 0; n < i; n++)
                    pi = pl->left;
                 for (n * 0; n < j; n++)
                    p2 = p2->right;
                 return (pi == p2);
              }
  FIG. 9.22   Example of a C function that uses structures of the type defined in Figure 9.21.


 TABLE 9.1    Access-path matrix for the point just preceding
              the retu rn in Figure 9.22. The value at the
              intersection of row _hvarl and column varl
              represents the path from the original value
              of varl to the current value of varl. A      entry
              means there is no such path.

                             ptr         Pi             P2

              _hptr          €           left +         right+
              _hpl           -           left +         right+
              _hp2           -           left +         right+



              just preceding the re tu rn is given in Table 9.1. The theorem prover can, given the
              axioms in Figure 9.21(b), prove that the function returns 0.
                   Note that, like most powerful theories, those that describe pointer operations
              are undecidable. Thus the theorem prover may answer any of “ yes,” “ no,” or
              “ maybe” for a particular problem.


9.7           W rap-Up
              As we have seen in this chapter, dependence analysis is a tool that is vital to instruc­
              tion scheduling and data-cache optimization, both of which are discussed in their
              own chapters below.
                  For instruction scheduling, dependence analysis determines the ordering rela­
              tionships between instructions that must be satisfied for the code to execute correctly,
Section 9.8    Further Reading                                                        289

and so determines the freedom available to the scheduler to rearrange the code to
improve performance. In doing so, it takes into account as many of the relevant re­
sources as it can. It definitely must determine ordering among instructions that affect
and depend on registers and implicit resources, such as condition codes. It usually
will also disambiguate memory addresses to the degree it is able—often depending
on information passed on to it from earlier phases of the compilation process—again
so as to provide the maximum latitude for scheduling.
     As a tool for data-cache optimization, the primary purpose of dependence ana­
lysis is to determine, for two or more given memory references— usually subscripted
array references nested inside one or more loops—whether the areas of memory they
access overlap and what relation they have to each other if they do overlap. This
determines, for example, whether they both (or all) write to the same location, or
whether one writes to it and the other reads from it, etc. Determining what depen­
dences do hold and which loops they are carried by provides a large fraction of the
information necessary to reorder or otherwise modify the loops and array references
to improve data-cache performance. It is also an essential tool for compilers that do
automatic vectorization and/or parallelization, but that subject is beyond the scope
of this book.
     Also, we discussed a relatively new intermediate-code form called the program-
dependence graph that makes dependences explicit and that has been proposed as
a basis for doing data-cache optimization and other sorts of optimizations. Several
variations on this concept are referred to in the text, suggesting that it is not yet clear
which, if any, of them will become important tools for optimization.
     We devoted another of the final sections of the chapter to techniques for de­
pendence analysis of dynamically allocated objects that are accessed by pointers.
This is an area that has been the subject of research for well over 20 years, and
while effective methods for performing it are becoming available, they are also very
computation-intensive, leaving it in doubt as to whether such techniques will come
to be important components in production compilers.




Further Reading
The reader interested in an exposition of the use of dependence analysis to drive
vectorization or parallelization should consult [Wolf92], [Wolf89b], [Bane88], or
[ZimC91].
     The use of resource vectors to compute latency is described in [BraH91]. Our
description of the pipeline of the m i p s R40005s floating-point pipeline is derived
from [KanH92]. Use of a deterministic finite automaton to compute latency is de­
scribed in [ProF94].
     Dependence vectors are defined by Wolf and Lam in [WolL91]. The proof that
general dependence testing in loop nests is NP-complete is found in [MayH91]. The
GCD test developed by Banerjee and Towle is described in [Bane76] and [Towl76].
The classes of separable and weakly separable array references are defined in
[Call86]. Among the other types of dependence tests in use are the following:
290         Dependence Analysis and Dependence Graphs

                Dependence Test                             References

                The extended GCD test                       [Bane88]
                The strong and weak SIV (single index       [GofK91]
                  variable) tests
                The Delta test                              [GofK91]
                The Acyclic test                            [MayH91]
                The Power test                              [WolT90]
                The Simple Loop Residue test                [MayH91]
                The Fourier-Motzkin test                    [DanE73] and
                                                               [MayH91]
                The Constraint-Matrix test                  [Wall88]
                The Omega test                              [PugW92]
            [GofK91] and [MayH91] evaluate several tests for their applicability and practi­
            cality.
                 Program-dependence graphs are defined in [Fer087]. The alternative forms
            are the dependence flowgraph defined in [JohP93], the program-dependence web
            of [CamK93], and the value-dependence graph of [WeiC94].
                 The early work on assigning types to variables in dynamic languages was done
            by Tenenbaum ([Tene74a] and [Tene74b]) and by Jones and Muchnick ([JonM76]
            and [JonM78]).
                 Some of the pioneering work in characterizing the memory usage and de­
            pendences among recursive data structures was done by Jones and Muchnick in
            [JonM 81a]. More recent work is reported in [WolH90], [Deut94], and [HumH94].


9.9         Exercises
      9.1   (a) What are the dependences between the lir instructions in the following basic
            block? (b) Use Build_DAG( ) to construct the scheduling DAG for the block and
            draw the resulting dependence DAG.
                rl <- [r7+4](4)
                r2 <- [r7+8](2)
                r3 «- r2 + 2
                r4 <- rl + r2
                [r5] (4) <- r4
                r4 <- r5 - r3
                [r5](4)     r4
                [r7+r2](2)     r3
                r4 <- r3 + r4
                r3 <- r7 + r4
                r7 <- r7 + 2
      9.2 Let the floating-point addition instruction have the following resource vector:
                1     2      3       4       5     6    7
                u     S,A    A,R     R,S
             Section 9.9         Exercises                                                     291

                  Supposing that the lir add instruction f4 <- f3 + 1.0 is available for initiation
             in cycle 1, compute the latency of the instruction with the pipeline containing
             instructions that use the following execution resources in the following stages of
             the pipeline:
                 1         2         3       4   5     6   7     8        9     10      11
                 M         U,A       A       S   R,S   S   M     M,U      A     S,A     R
        9.3 Hewlett-Packard’s pa-risc compilers build the basic-block scheduling DAG back­
            ward, i.e., from the leaves toward the roots, so as to track uses of condition
            flags and the instructions that set them. Code a version of Build_DAG( ) called
            Build_Back_DAG ( ) that does this for lir code.
  ADV 9.4 Research the notion of extending the dependence graph from a basic block to any
          single-entry, single-exit subgraph of a flowgraph that contains no loops. Does this
          give additional freedom in instruction scheduling? If so, give an example. If not,
          why not?
        9.5 What is the iteration-space traversal of the following triply nested hir loop?
                for i <- 1 to n do
                   for j <r- n by -1 to 1 do
                       for k <r- 1 to n+1 do
             51          A[i,j,k] <r- A[i,j-l,k-l] + A[i-l,j,k]
             52          B[i,j-l,k] <r- A[i,j-l,k-l] * 2.0
             53          A[i,j,k+1] <r- B[i,j,k] + 1.0
                       endfor
                   endfor
                endfor
        9.6 Given the loop nest in the preceding exercise, what are the execution-order and
            dependence relationships within it?
        9.7 (a) Write an algorithm that, given a distance vector, produces the minimal depen­
            dence vector that covers it, where d\ covers di if and only if any dependence ex­
            pressed by d j is also represented by d\. (b) Do the same thing for direction vectors.
        9.8 Give a three-deep loop nest that the GCD test determines independence for.
 RSCH 9.9 Research the Delta test described in [GofK91]. (a) How does it work? (b) How
          effective is it? (c) What does it cost?
RSCH 9.10 Research the Omega test described in [PugW92]. (a) How does it work? (b) How
          effective is it? (c) What does it cost?
RSCH 9.11 Research the notion of extending dependence to synchronized accesses to shared
          variables in a parallel language; i.e., what are appropriate meanings for Si <$f S 2 ,
          Si <$a S 2 , etc. in this situation?
                                                                CHAPTER 10




                                       Alias Analysis




A
          lias analysis refers to the determination of storage locations that may be
          accessed in two or more ways. For example, a C variable may have its ad­
          dress computed and be assigned to or read from both by name and through
          a pointer, as shown in Figure 10.1, a situation that can be visualized as shown in
Figure 10.2, where the boxes represent the variables, with each box labeled with its
name and containing its value. As hinted at in Chapter 8, determining the range of
possible aliases in a program is essential to optimizing it correctly, while minimiz­
ing the sets of aliases found is important to doing optimization as aggressively as
possible. If we should happen to miss identifying an alias, we can very easily pro­
duce incorrect code for a program. Consider the C code fragment in Figure 10.3.
The second k = a + 5 assignment is redundant if and only if both the call to f ( )
and the assignment through the pointer q leave the values of both k and a unmodi­
fied. Since the address of k is passed to f ( ), it might alter k’s value. Since q is exter­
nal, either f ( ) or some earlier unshown code in procedure examl( ) might have
set it to point to either a or k. If either of these situations is the case, the second
k = a + 5 assignment is not provably redundant. If neither of them is the case, the
assignment is redundant. This example shows the significance of both intrapro­
cedural and interprocedural alias determination. In practice, intraprocedural alias
determination is usually the more important of the two. We consider it here in detail
and leave the interprocedural case to Chapter 19.
     Despite the fact that high-quality aliasing information is essential to correct
and aggressive optimization, there are many programs for which only the most
minimal such information is needed. Despite the fact that a C program may contain
arbitrarily complex aliasing, it is sufficient for most C programs to assume that only
variables whose addresses are computed are aliased and that any pointer-valued
variable may point to any of them. In most cases, this assumption places minimal
restrictions on optimization. If, on the other hand, we have a C program with
200 variables such that 100 of them have their addresses computed and the other

                                                                               293
294           Alias Analysis


              mainO
              { int *p;
                 int n;
                 p = &n;
                 n = 4;
                 printf ("°/0d\n",*p);
              >
  FIG. 10.1 Simple pointer aliasing in C.




                       n       4

  FIG. 10.2 Relationship between the variables at the call to p rin tf ( ) in Figure 10.1.


              examl( )
              { int a, k;
                 extern int *q;

                  k = a + 5;
                  f(a,&k);
                  *q = 13;
                  k = a + 5;       /* redundant? */

              >
  FIG. 10.3 Example of the importance of alias computation.


              100 are pointer-valued, then clearly aggressive alias analysis is essential to most
              optimizations that might be performed on the program.
                   In the following chapters on global optimization, we generally assume that alias
              analysis has been performed and do not mention it further. Nevertheless, the reader
              must be aware that alias analysis is essential to performing most optimizations
              correctly, as the above example suggests.
                   It is useful to distinguish may alias information from must alias information.
              The former indicates what may occur on some path through a flowgraph, while the
              latter indicates what must occur on all paths through the flowgraph. If, for example,
              every path through a procedure includes an assignment of the address of variable
              x to variable p and only assigns that value to p, then “p points to x ” is must alias
              information for the procedure. On the other hand, if the procedure includes paths
              that assign the address of y to pointer variable q on one of the paths and the address
              of z on another, then “ q may point to y or z ” is may alias information.
                   It is also useful to distinguish flow-sensitive from flow-insensitive alias informa­
              tion. Flow-insensitive information is independent of the control flow encountered in
     Alias Analysis                                                                                  295


     a procedure, while flow-sensitive aliasing information depends on control flow. An
     example of a flow-insensitive statement about aliasing is that “ p may point to x be­
     cause there is a path on which p is assigned the address of x .” The statement simply
     indicates that a particular aliasing relationship may hold anywhere in the procedure
     because it does hold somewhere in the procedure. A flow-sensitive example might
     indicate that “p points to x in block B 7 .” The above-mentioned approach to alias
     analysis for C that simply distinguishes variables whose addresses are taken is flow
     insensitive; the method we describe in detail below is flow sensitive.
          In general, the may vs. must classification is important because it tells us whether
     a property must hold, and hence can be counted on, or that it only may hold, and so
     must be allowed for but cannot be counted on. The flow-sensitivity classification
     is important because it determines the computational complexity of the problem
     under consideration. Flow-insensitive problems can usually be solved by solving
     subproblems and then combining their solutions to provide a solution for the whole
     problem, independent of control flow. Flow-sensitive problems, on the other hand,
     require that one follow the control-flow paths through the flowgraph to compute
     their solutions.
         The formal characterization of aliasing depends on whether we are concerned
     with may or must information and whether it is flow sensitive or flow insensitive.
     The cases are as follows:
1.   Flow-insensitive may information: In this case, aliasing is a binary relation on the
     variables in a procedure alias e Var x Var, such that x alias y if and only if x and
     y may, possibly at different times, refer to the same storage location. The relation is
     symmetric and intransitive.1 The relation is intransitive because the fact that a and b
     may refer to the same storage location at some point and b and c may, likewise, refer
     to the same location at some point does not allow us to conclude anything about a
     and c—the relationships a alias b and b alias c may simply hold at different points
     in the procedure.
2.   Flow-insensitive must information: In this case, aliasing is again a binary relation
     alias e Var x Var, but with a different meaning. We have x alias y if and only if
     x and y must, throughout the execution of a procedure, refer to the same storage
     location. This relation is symmetric and transitive. If a and b must refer to the same
     storage location throughout execution of a procedure and b and c must refer to the
     same storage location throughout execution of the procedure, then, clearly, a and c
     refer to the same location also.
3.   Flow-sensitive may information: In this case, aliasing can be thought of as a set
     of binary relations, one for each program point (i.e., between two instructions) in
     a procedure that describes the relationships between variables at that point, but it
     is clearer and easier to reason about if we make aliasing a function from program
     points and variables to sets of abstract storage locations. In this formulation, for a
     program point p and a variable v, Alias(p, v) = SL means that at point p variable v


     1. It does not matter whether we make the relation reflexive or irreflexive, since x alias x provides
     no useful information.
296        Alias Analysis


           may refer to any of the locations in SL. Now if Alias(p, a) Pi Alias(p, b) ^ 0 and
           A lias(p,b) fl A lias(p,c) ^ 0, then it may be the case that Alias(p, a) Pi Alias(p,c)
           7^ 0 also, but this is not necessarily the case. Also, if p i, p2, and p3 are distinct pro­
           gram points, Alias(p i , a) Pi A lias(p2,a) ^ 0, and A lias(p2,a) Pi A lias(p3,a) ^ 0,
           then, likewise, it may also be the case that Alias{p i, a) Pi Alias(p3^a) ^ 0.
      4.   Flow-sensitive must information: In this case, aliasing is best characterized as a
           function from program points and variables to abstract storage locations (not
           sets of locations). In this formulation, for a program point p and a variable z/,
           Alias(p, Z/) = / means that at point p variable z/ must refer to location /. Now if
           Alias(p, <z) = Alias(p, b) and Alias(p, b) = Alias(p, c), then it must be the case
           that A lias(p,a) = A lias(p,c) also. Similarly, if p i, p2, and p3 are distinct pro­
           gram points, A/z'tfs(pi, a) = Alias(p2, a), and Alias(p2^ a) = Alias(p3, a), then it
           must also be the case that A lia s(p l,a ) = A lias{p3,a). Thus, flow-sensitive must
           aliasing information for a particular program point is a transitive relation between
           variables, and flow-sensitive must information for a particular variable is a transitive
           relation between program points. It is also easy to see that each of those relations is
           symmetric.

           This classification is further complicated by the inclusion of pointers in a language
           as is the case, for example, in C. Then any object that may refer to a storage
           location, such as a pointer field in a record, may be aliased to any other reference
           to a location. Thus, in a language with pointers, aliasing is a relation or function
           between references to locations, where references include any objects that may have
           pointers as their values, not just variables.
                The sources of aliases vary from language to language, but there is a common
           component to alias computation as well. For example, a language may allow two
           variables to overlay one another or may allow one to be a pointer to the other or
           not, but regardless of these language-specific rules, if variable a is pointed to by
           variable b and b is pointed to by c at a given execution point, then a is reachable by
           following pointers from c. Thus, we divide alias computation into two parts:1

      1.   a language-specific component, called the alias gatherer\ that we expect the compiler
           front end to provide us; and
      2.   a single component in the optimizer, called the alias propagator\ that performs a
           data-flow analysis using the aliasing relations discovered by the front end to combine
           aliasing information and transfer it to the points where it is needed.

           The language-specific alias gatherer may discover aliases that are present because of

      1.   overlapping of the memory allocated for two objects;
      2.   references to arrays, array sections, or array elements;
      3.   references through pointers;
      4.   parameter passing; or
      5.   combinations of the above mechanisms.
              Section 10.1      Aliases in Various Real Programming Languages                   297


              exam2( )
              { int a, b, c[100], d, i ;
                 extern int *q;

                  q = &a;
                  a = 2;
                  b = *q + 2;

                  q = &b;
                  for (i = 0; i < 100; i++) {
                     c[i] = c[i] + a;
                     *q - i ;
                  >
                  d = *q + a;
              >
 FIG . 10.4   Different aliases in different parts o f a procedure.


                   Before we delve into the details, we consider the granularity of aliasing informa­
              tion that we might compute and its effects. In particular, it might be the case that
              two variables are provably not aliased in one segment of a procedure, but that they
              are either aliased or not determinable not to be aliased in another part of it. An ex­
              ample of this is shown in Figure 10.4. Flere q points to a in the first section of the
              code, while it points to b in the second section. If we were to do flow-insensitive
              may alias computation for the entire procedure (assuming that no other statements
              affect the possible aliases), we would simply conclude that q could point to either a
              or b. This would prevent us from moving the assignment *q = i out of the f o r loop.
              On the other hand, if we computed aliases with finer granularity, we could conclude
              that q cannot point to a inside the loop, which would allow us to replace the *q = i
              assignment inside the loop with a single *q = 100, or even b = 100, after the loop.
              While this degree of discrimination is definitely valuable in many cases, it may be
              beyond the scope of what is acceptable in compilation time and memory space. One
              choice is that of the Sun compilers (see Section 21.1), namely, (optional) aggressive
              computation of alias information, while the other is taken in the m i p s compilers,
              which simply assume that any variable whose address is computed can be aliased.
                   Thus, we leave it to the individual compiler writer to choose the granularity
              appropriate for a given implementation. We describe an approach that does distin­
              guish individual points within a procedure; the reader can easily modify it to one that
              does not.


10.1          Aliases in Various Real Programming Languages
              Next we consider the forms of alias information that should be collected by a
              front end and passed on to the alias propagator. We examine four commonly used
              languages, namely, Fortran 77, Pascal, C, and Fortran 90. We assume that the
              reader is generally familiar with each of the languages. Following exploration of
              aliasing in these four languages, we present an approach to alias gathering that
298      Alias Analysis


         is similar in some respects to that taken in the Hewlett-Packard compilers for pa-
         risc , but that differs from it significantly in alias propagation. While that compiler’s
         propagation method is flow insensitive, ours is specifically flow sensitive—in fact,
         the propagation method we use is data-flow-analytic, i.e., it performs a data-flow
         analysis to determine the aliases.


10.1.1   Aliases in Fortran 77
         In ANSI-standard Fortran 77, there are comparatively few ways to create aliases and
         they are mostly detectable exactly during compilation. However, one consideration
         we must keep in mind is that established programming practice in this area occasion­
         ally violates the Fortran 77 standard; and most compilers follow practice, at least to
         some degree, rather than the standard.
              The EQUIVALENCE statement can be used to specify that two or more scalar
         variables, array variables, and/or contiguous portions of array variables begin at
         the same storage location. The variables are local to the subprogram in which they
         are equivalenced, unless they are also specified in a COMMON statement, in which case
         they may be accessible to several subprograms. Thus, the effects of aliases created
         by EQUIVALENCE statements are purely local and statically determinable, as long as
         the equivalenced variables are not also in common storage, as described in the next
         paragraph.
              The COMMON statement associates variables in different subprograms with the
         same storage. COMMON is unusual for modern programming languages in that it
         associates variables by location, rather than by name. Determining the full effects
         of variables in common storage requires interprocedural analysis, but one can at
         least determine locally that a variable is potentially affected by other subprograms
         because it is in common storage.
              In Fortran 77, parameters are passed in such a way that, as long as the actual
         argument is associated with a named storage location (e.g., it is a variable or an array
         element, rather than a constant or an expression), the called subprogram can change
         the value of the actual argument by assigning a value to the corresponding formal
         parameter.2 It is not specified in the standard whether the mechanism of argument-
         parameter association is call by reference or call by value-result; both implement the
         Fortran 77 convention correctly.
              Section 15.9.3.6 of the Fortran 77 standard says that if one passes the same ac­
         tual argument to two or more formal parameters of a subprogram or if an argument
         is an object in common storage, then neither the subprogram nor any subprograms in
         the call chain below it can assign a new value to the argument. If compilers enforced
         this rule, the only aliases in Fortran 77 would be those created by EQUIVALENCE and
         COMMON statements. Unfortunately, some programs violate this rule and compilers
         sometimes use it to decide whether a construct can be optimized in a particular way.
         Thus, we might consider there to also exist a “ practical” Fortran 77 that includes
         aliases created by parameter passing (see Section 15.2 for an example), but we would


         2. The actual Fortran terminology is “ actual argument” and “ dummy argument.”
         Section 10.1      Aliases in Various Real Programming Languages                                 299

         be on dangerous ground in doing so—some compilers would support it consistently,
         others inconsistently, and some possibly not at all.
             Fortran 77 has no global storage other than variables in common, so there are no
         other ways to create aliases with nonlocal objects than by placing them in common
         or by violating the parameter-passing conventions as just described.
             Several Fortran 77 compilers include the Cray extensions. These provide, among
         other things, a limited pointer type. A pointer variable may be set to point to a
         scalar variable, an array variable, or an absolute storage location (called the pointer’s
         pointee), and the pointer’s value may be changed during execution of a program.
         However, it cannot point to another pointer. Also, a pointee cannot appear in a
         COMMON or EQUIVALENCE statement or be a formal parameter. This extension greatly
         increases the possibilities for alias creation, since multiple pointers may point to the
         same location. The Cray compiler, on the other hand, assumes during compilations
         performed with optimization enabled that no two pointers point to the same location
         and, more generally, that a pointee is never overlaid on another variable’s storage.
         Clearly, this places the burden of alias analysis on the programmer and can cause
         programs to produce different results according to whether optimization is enabled
         or not, but it also allows the compiler to proceed without doing alias analysis on
         pointers or to proceed by making worst-case assumptions about them.


10.1.2   Aliases in Pascal
         In ANSI-standard Pascal, there are several mechanisms for creating aliases, including
         variant records, pointers, variable parameters, access to nonlocal variables by nested
         procedures, recursion, and values returned by functions.
              Variables of a user-defined record type may have multiple variants and the
         variants may be either tagged or untagged. Allowing multiple untagged variants
         is similar to having equivalenced variables in Fortran 77—if a variable is of an
         untagged variant-record type, its variant fields may be accessed by two or more sets
         of names.
              A Pascal variable of a pointer type is restricted to have either the value n i l or
         to point to objects of a particular specified type. Since the language provides no
         way to obtain the address of an existing object, a non-null pointer can point only
         to an object allocated dynamically by the procedure new( ). new(p) takes a pointer
         variable p as its argument, allocates an object of the type declared to be pointed to
         by p, and sets p to point to it.3 Pointer variables of a given type may be assigned
         to other pointer variables of the same type, so multiple pointers may point to the
         same object. Thus, an object may be accessible through several pointers at once, but
         it cannot both have its own variable name and be accessible through a pointer.
              Pascal procedure parameters are either value parameters or variable parameters.
         An actual argument passed to a value parameter cannot be changed by the called
         procedure through the parameter, and so value parameters do not create aliases.


         3. new( ) may be given additional arguments that specify nested variants of the record type its first
         argument points to; in that case, it allocates an object of the specified variant type.
300      Alias Analysis


         Variable parameters, on the other hand, allow the called routine to change the
         associated actual argument, and hence do create aliases.
              Also, Pascal allows procedure definitions to be nested and inner procedures to
         access variables defined in outer ones, as long as they are visible, i.e., as long as
         no intervening procedure in the nesting sequence defines a variable with the same
         name. Thus, for example, a dynamically allocated object in a Pascal program may
         be accessible as a variable parameter, through a locally declared pointer, and through
         a nonlocally declared pointer all at once.
             A Pascal procedure may be recursive, so that a variable declared in an inner
         scope may be accessible to multiple invocations and a local variable of one invoca­
         tion of it may be accessible as a variable parameter of a deeper invocation.
              Finally, a Pascal procedure may return a pointer and hence can create an alias
         for a dynamically allocated object.


10.1.3   Aliases in C
         In ANSI-standard C, there is one mechanism for creating static aliases, namely, the
         union type specifier, which is similar in its effect to Fortran 77’s EQUIVALENCE
         construct. A union type may have several fields declared, all of which overlap in
         storage. C union types differ from Fortran’s equivalenced variables, however, in that
         a union type may be accessed by a pointer and may be dynamically allocated.
              Notice that we did not say “ dynamically allocated and so accessed by a pointer”
         in the last sentence. C allows objects to be dynamically allocated and, of course,
         references to them must be through pointers, since there is no dynamic name-
         creation mechanism. Such objects can be referenced through multiple pointers, so
         pointers may alias each other. In addition, it is legal in C to compute the address
         of an object with the & operator, regardless of whether it is statically, automatically,
         or dynamically allocated and to access or store to it through a pointer assigned its
         address.
              C also allows arithmetic on pointers and considers it equivalent to array
         indexing—increasing a pointer to an array element by 1 causes it to point to the
         next element of the array. Suppose we have the code fragment

             in t a [1 0 0 ], *p ;

             p = a;
             p = &a [0] ;
             a [ l ] = 1;
             * ( p + 2) = 2 ;

         Then the two assignments to p assign it exactly the same value, namely, the address
         of the zeroth element of array a [ ] , and the following two assignments assign 1 to
         a [1] and 2 to a [2], respectively. Even though a C array b [ ] declared to be of length
         n contains elements numbered from 0 through « — 1, it is legal to address b [«],
         as in
         Section 10.1    Aliases in Various Real Programming Languages                       301

             int b[100], p;

             fo r (p = b; p < &b[100]; p++)
             *p = 0;

         but not valid to dereference b M . Thus, a pointer-valued expression may alias an
         array element, and the element it aliases may change over time. Pointer arithmetic
         could conceivably be used indiscriminately to sweep through memory and create
         arbitrary aliases, but the ansi C standard rules the behavior of code that does this
         to be undefined (see Section 3.3.6 of the ansi C standard).
              C also can create aliases by parameter passing and by returning a pointer value
         from a function. Although all arguments in C are passed by value, they can create
         aliases because they may be pointers to arbitrary objects. Also, there is no restriction
         in C regarding passing the same object as two distinct arguments to a function, so,
         for example, a function such as

             f (i,j)
             int *i, *j;
             {    *i = *j + 1;
             >

         can be invoked with a call such as f (&k,&k), unlike in standard Fortran 77. Further,
         an argument may point to a global variable, making it accessible in the procedure
         both by name and through the pointer. A pointer returned as the value of a function
         may point to any object accessible both to the function and to its caller, and hence
         may be aliased to any actual argument to the function that is a pointer or any object
         with global scope.
              As in Pascal, recursion can also create aliases—a pointer to a local variable of
         one invocation of a recursive routine may be passed to a deeper invocation of it and
         a static variable may be accessible to multiple levels of invocations.


10.1.4   Aliases in Fortran 90
         Standard Fortran 90 includes Fortran 77 as a subset, so all the possibilities for
         creating aliases in Fortran 77 also apply to Fortran 90. In addition, three new
         mechanisms can create aliases, namely, pointers, recursion, and internal procedures.
             A Fortran 90 pointer may refer to any object that has the TARGET attribute,
         which may be any dynamically allocated object or a named object declared with
         that attribute. Possible targets include simple variables, arrays, and array slices.
             Recursion creates aliases in essentially the same way that it does in Pascal and C.
         The only significant difference is that a Fortran 90 recursive routine must be declared
         RECURSIVE.
             Internal procedures create aliases in the same ways as in Pascal—nonlocal vari­
         ables may be accessed through the argument-parameter association mechanism also.
302    Alias Analysis


       The Fortran 90 standard extends the restriction in the Fortran 77 standard concern­
       ing changes made through such aliases, but, in our opinion, this is as likely to be
       observed consistently in practice as the original restriction.


10.2   The Alias Gatherer
       To describe the kinds of aliases encountered in Fortran 77, Pascal, C, Fortran 90, and
       other compiled languages, we use several relations that represent possible aliasing
       relationships among linguistic objects and several functions that map potentially
       aliased objects to abstract storage locations. In both cases, the classifications are
       “ potential” since we must err on the side of conservatism—if there may be an alias
       relationship between two objects and we cannot prove that there isn’t, we must
       record it as potentially present, lest we miss an alias that actually is present and
       possibly optimize the program in a way inconsistent with its semantics as a result.
            As we shall see in the development that follows, there is a series of choices we
       must make as to how finely we discriminate among possible aliases. For example,
       if we have a structure s with two members s i and s2 in either Pascal or C, then
       the storage for s overlaps with that for both s . s l and s .s 2 , but s . s l and s .s 2
       do not overlap each other. This distinction may or may not be important to make,
       and there are trade-offs that can guide our choice. Making the distinction generally
       requires more space during compilation, and usually more time, and may result in
       better code. As compiler writers, we can either make the choice once and for all, or
       we can leave it to the user to select one or the other, generally as just one part of
       selecting the amount of effort expended in optimization. The choice to take one or
       the other of these approaches may be guided by the amount of effort we can devote
       to writing a compiler, but it should also be guided by experience that determines the
       differential effectiveness of the approaches.
            We can choose to try to distinguish dynamically allocated storage areas from
       one another, or not to do so. If we do distinguish them, we need a way to name
       such areas and a means to keep the overall representation of aliasing information
       bounded in size. In the treatment that follows, we do not attempt to distinguish
       dynamically allocated storage areas; instead we simply lump them together by type
       or all in one, as appropriate for the language we are processing.
            Also, as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, we can choose flow-sensitive
       or flow-insensitive aliasing, i.e., to distinguish alias relationships at individual points
       within a procedure or not. Our analysis here distinguishes them; collapsing the
       information we collect so as not to differentiate among points within a procedure
       is an easy exercise.
            We gather individual items of alias information from individual statements in the
       source code and pass them on to an optimizer component called the alias propagator
       (discussed in the next section) to propagate them to all points within a procedure.
       For alias gathering, we consider the flowgraph of a procedure to consist of individual
       statements connected by control-flow edges. Alternatively, we could use basic blocks
       and compute the effect of a block as the functional composition of the effects of its
       individual statements.
           Section 10.2     The Alias Gatherer                                                     303




FIG. 10.5 A flowgraph that provides examples of aliasing concepts.




                Let P denote a program point, i.e., a point between two statements in a program;
           in the flowgraph representation, a program point P labels an edge. The program
           points entry+ and e x it - , respectively, immediately follow the entry node and imme­
           diately precede the exit node. Let stmt(P) denote the (unique) statement immediately
           preceding P in the flowgraph.
                The flowgraph in Figure 10.5 is designed to illustrate some of the concepts used
           in alias gathering and propagation. It has a single instruction in each node, and the
           edges are labeled with program points, namely, entry+, 1, 2 , . . . , and e x it - , stm t(l)
           is re ce iv e p (v a l) and stm t(exi t - ) is re tu rn q.
                Let x denote a scalar variable, an array, a structure, the value of a pointer,
           etc., and let memp(x) denote an abstract memory location associated with object
           x (at point P in a program). Let star(o) denote a static or automatically allocated
           memory area occupied by linguistic object o. Let anon(ty) denote the “ anonymous”
           dynamic memory allocated for objects of type ty and anon denote all dynamic
           memory allocated in a procedure. We assume that all typed anonymous areas are
           distinct, i.e.,

               Wyl, ty2, if ty\ ^ ty l, then anon(ty\) ^ anon(ty2)
304        Alias Analysis


           For all P and x, memp(x) is either star(x) ifx is statically or automatically allocated,
           anon(ty) if x is dynamically allocated (where ty is the type of x), or anon if x is
           dynamically allocated and its type is not known. We use nil to denote the null pointer
           value.
                The memory associated with i at point 2 in Figure 10.5, written raem2(i), is
           star{i) and mem^{q) is anon(p tr), where p tr denotes the type of a pointer. Also,
           ptr9(p) = ptr9(q).
                Let any denote the set of all possible storage locations and any{ty), where ty is a
           type, denote all possible locations of that type; the latter and anon(ty) are useful
           for Pascal, since it restricts each pointer to point only to objects of a particular
           type. Let globals denote the set of all possible globally accessible storage locations.
           For Fortran, globals includes all locations in common storage; for C, it includes
           all variables declared outside procedure bodies and those declared with the extern
           attribute.
                We define a series of functions that map program points P and objects x that
           may hold values (i.e., variables, arrays, structure fields, etc.) to abstract memory
           locations, as follows:

      1.   ovrp(x) = the set of abstract memory locations that x may overlap with at program
           point P.
      2.   ptrp(x) = the set of abstract memory locations that x may point to at program
           point P.
      3.   refp(x) = the set of abstract memory locations reachable through arbitrarily many
           dereferences from x at program point P; note that if we define refp(x) = ptrp(x) and
           for i > 1,

               refp(x) = ptr? (fields{reflf l {x)))

           where fields(x) is x if x is a pointer and is the set of pointer-valued fields in x if x is
           a structure, then
                            oo
               refp(x) = ( J refp(x)
                            i= l

           In many cases, computing refp(x) could result in nontermination. Any practical alias
           propagator needs to include a way to terminate such computations, at worst by re­
           turning any or any{ty) after some number of iterations. The appropriate method
           depends on the problem being solved and the desired degree of detail of the infor­
           mation obtained.
      4.   ref(x) = the set of abstract memory locations reachable through arbitrarily many
           dereferences from x, independent of the program point.

           We also define a predicate extal{x), which is true if and only ifx may have (possibly
           unknown) aliases external to the current procedure, and two functions that map
           procedure names to sets of abstract memory locations, as follows:
     Section 10.2      The Alias Gatherer                                                  305

1.   usesp(pn) = the set of abstract memory locations that a call to procedure pn in
     stmt(P) may have used, and
2.   modsp(pn) = the set of abstract memory locations that a call to procedure pn in
     stmt(P) may have modified.
         Now, consider standard Fortran 77’s aliasing rules. We can express them quite
     simply in our notation as follows:
1.   if variables a and b are equivalenced in a subprogram, then for all P in it, ovrp(a) =
     ovrp(b) = [memp(a)\ — {memp(b)} and
2.   if variable a is declared to be in common storage in a subprogram, then extal(a) is
     true.
     It follows from (2) that for any call to a subprogram pn that occurs as stmt(P), if
     extal(a) then {memp(a)} c usespipn); also, {memp(a)} c modsp(pn) if and only if a
     is an actual argument to the call to pn in stmt(P).
          The Cray Fortran extensions, Fortran 90, and Pascal all represent increased
     levels of complexity in alias determination, compared to Fortran 77. However, the
     extreme case is represented by aliasing in C, which we consider next. It requires
     many more rules and much greater complexity to describe. We assume for alias
     analysis that an array is an aggregate of unknown structure. Thus, a pointer to an
     element of an array is assumed to alias the entire array.
          Note that the following set of rules does not describe C completely. Instead, it
     is sufficient to give the flavor of the types of rules needed and a model for how to
     construct them.
          In all the rules for C below and in the next section, P is a program point and
     P' is a (usually, the only) program point preceding P. If P has multiple predecessors,
     the appropriate generalization is to form the union of the right-hand sides over all
     predecessors, as shown below in Section 10.3.
1.   If stmt(P) assigns a null pointer value to p, then

         ptrP(p) = 0

     This includes, e.g., failure returns from an allocator such as the C library’s m alloc ( )
     function.
2.   If stmt(P) assigns a dynamically allocated storage area to p, e.g., by a call to
     m allo c( ) or c a llo c ( ) , then

         ptrp(p) = anon

3.   If stmt(P) is “p = &<z” , then

         ptrP(p) = {memp(a)} = {memp<{a)}

4.   If stmt(P) is “p i = p 2 ” , where p i and p2 are pointers, then

         ptrF<p»    = p,rF(PZ> = j\ puA             otherw|se
                                    tnemeatrj+(*p2) HP' = entry+
                                        pl)
306         Alias Analysis


       5.   If stmt(P) is “p i = p 2->p 3” , where p i and p2 are pointers and p3 is a pointer field,
            then

                 ptvp(pl) = ptrP,(p2->p3)

       6.   If stmt(P) is “p = ka [exprl ” , where p is a pointer and a is an array, then

                 ptrP(p ) = ovrp(a) = ovrp'(a) = {memP>{a)}

       7.   If stmt(P) is “p = p + /” , where p is a pointer and i is integer-valued, then

                 ptrP(p) = ptrP,(p)

       8.   If stmt(P) is “ *p =           then

                 ptrP( p ) = p t r P,(p)

            and if the value of *p is a pointer, then

                 ptrP(*p) = ptrP(a) = ptrF (a)

       9.   If stmt(P) tests “p == g ” for two pointer-valued variables and P labels the Y exit
            from the test, then

                 ptrP(p) = ptrP(q) = ptrP,(p) n ptrP,(q)

            since taking the Y exit establishes that p and q point to the same location.4
      10.   For st a structure type with fields s i through s«, and s a static or automatic object
            of type st and every P,
                                                  n
                 ovrp(s) = [memP(s)} = (^J {memP(s.si)}
                                              ;=1
            and also, for each /,

                 {memP(s.si)} = ovrP(s.si) c ovrP(s)

            and for all j # /,

                 ovrP( s . si) fl ovrp( s . s/) = 0

      11.   For st a structure type with fields s i through sn, and p a pointer such that stmt(P)
            allocates an object s of type st,
                                                      n
                 ptrp(p) = {memp(*p)\ = \J{m e m P(p->si)}
                                                  i= l


            4. No new information is available on the N exit, unless we use an even more complex approach
            to alias analysis involving sets of tuples of the current aliases of individual variables similar to the
            relational method of data-flow analysis developed by Jones and Muchnick [JonM81b].
             Section 10.3          The Alias Propagator                                            307

             and for each /,
                   {memp(*p->si)} = ptrP(p->si) C ptrP(s)

             and for all / ^ /,
                  ptrP(p->si) fl ptrP(p->sj) = 0

             and for all other objects x,

                  ptrP(p) n {memP(x)} = 0
             since upon allocation of the object each field has a distinct address.
       12.   For ut a union type with components u l through un, and u a static or automatic
             object of type ut and every P,

                   ovrp(u) = (m^mp(w)} = {memp(u.ui)}

             for / = 1 , . . . ,
       13.   For    a union type with components «1 through               and p a pointer such that
             stmt(P) allocates an object of type ut,

                  ptrP(p) = {raerap(*p)} = {memP(p->ui)}

             for / = 1 , . . . ,    also, for all other objects x,

                  ptrP(p) IT {memP(x)} = 0

       14.   If stmt(P) includes a call to a function /*( ), then

                              = refF (p)
             for all pointers p that are arguments to       ), for those that are global, or for those
             that are assigned the value returned by f ( ).
             Again, as noted above, this is not a complete set of rules for C, but is enough to cover
             a significant part of the language and the difficulties it presents to alias analysis. This
             description suffices for the three examples we work out in the next section, and may
             be extended by the reader as necessary.


10.3         The Alias Propagator
             Now that we have a method for describing the sources of aliases in a program
             in an essentially language-independent way, we proceed to describe the optimizer
             component that propagates that information to each individual statement and that
             makes it available for other components to use.
                 To propagate information about aliases from their defining points to all the
             points in a procedure that might need it, we use data-flow analysis. The flow func­
             tions for individual statements are those described in the preceding section, ovrp{ )
             and ptrP{ ). The global flow functions are capitalized versions of the same names.
308        Alias Analysis


           In particular, let P denote the set of program points in a procedure, O the set of ob­
           jects visible in it, and S the set of abstract memory locations. Then ovr: P x O -> 2s
           and Ptr: P x O -> 2s map pairs of program points and objects to the sets of abstract
           memory locations that they may overlap with or point to, respectively, at the given
           point in the procedure—in the case of P tr (), the argument objects are all pointers.
           O v r() and P tr() are defined as follows:
      1.   Let P be a program point such that stmt(P) has a single predecessor P'. Then
                 ^         ,   [ ovrp(x)            if stmt(P) affects x
                 O tr(P, jc) = 1                       ,
                               l O vr(P \x)         otherwise
           and
                 p (p f , \ - l PtrP(P) if stmt(P) affects p
                  r( ’ P> [ Ptr(P',p) otherwise
      2.   Let stmt(P) have multiple predecessors PI through Pn and assume, for simplicity,
           that stmt(P) is the empty statement. Then, for any object x:
                                  n
                 Ovr(P, x) =        Ovr(Pi, x)
                                i= 1
           and for any pointer variable p :
                                n
                 P£r(P, p) =          Ptr(Pi, p)
                               /= l

      3.   Let P be a program point followed by a test (which is assumed for simplicity’s sake
           not to call any functions or to modify any variables) with multiple successor points
           PI through Pn. Then, for each i and any object x:

                 Ovr(Pi, x) = Ovr(P, x)

           and for any pointer variable p:

                 Ptr(Pi, p) = Ptr(P, p)

           except that if we distinguish the Y exit from a test, we may have more precise
           information available, as indicated in case (9) above.
                 As initial values for the O v r{) and P tr{) functions, we use for local objects x:

                 Ovr(P, x) = I (stor(*)}           if P = entry+
                      ’      I0                    otherwise
           and for pointers p:
                                    0                     if P = entry+ and p is local
                                    any                   if P = entry+ and p is global
                 Ptr(P9p)
                                    {mementTy+(*p)}       if P = entry+ and p is a parameter
                                    0                     otherwise
           where star(x) denotes the memory area allocated for x to satisfy its local declaration.
           Section 10.3        The Alias Propagator                                          309

           typedef struct {int i; char c;} struct_type;
           struct.type s, *ps, **ppsl, **pps2, arr[100];

           ppsl = &ps;
           pps2 = ppsl;
           *pps2 = &s;
           ps->i = 13;
           func(ps);
           arr [1].i = 10;
FIG. 10.6 One of Coutant’s C aliasing examples.


           1      entry        |
                      entry+
               ppsl = &ps
                      1
               pps2 = ppsl
                      2
           | *pps2 = &s        |
                      3
           | ps->i = 13        |
                      4

           1    func(ps)       1
                      5
           | arr [1].i = 10 |
                      exit-
           |      exit         |

FIG. 10.7 Flowgraph for the C code in Figure 10.6.

                Next, we work three examples of alias gathering and propagation in C.
                The first, from Coutant [Cout86], is for the C code shown in Figure 10.6, for
           which we construct the flowgraph shown in Figure 10.7. We proceed by constructing
           the flow functions for the individual statements. For ppsl = &ps, we get
                p tr t (ppsl) = { m e n t i s ) } = {raeraentry+(Ps )} = { s t a r t s ) }
           For pps2 = pp sl, we get
                p tr2(pps2) = p tr2{ppsl) = p tr x(ppsl)

           For *pps2 = &s, we get
                P ^3(pps2) = p tr2(pps2)
                p tr 3(*pps2) = p trz {k s) = p tr2(k s) = ovr2( s)
310   Alias Analysis


      For ps->i = 13, we get no equations. For func(ps), we get

          ptrb(ps) = ref4(ps)

      And, finally, for a r r [1] . i = 10, we get no equations.
         The initial values of the Ovr( ) function are
          0&r(entry+, s)        = (star(s)}
          Ovr (entry+, ps)      = (star(ps)}
          Otr(entry+, ppsl) = (star(ppsl)}
          Ovr(e ntry+, pps2) = [star{ pps2)}
          Ovr(e ntry+, arr) = [star{ arr)}
      and Oi/r(P, x) = 0 and Ptr(P, p) — 0 for all other P, x, and p. Next, we compute
      the values of Ovr(P, x) and P£r(P, p) for P = 1, 2 , . . . , e x it - ; we show only those
      values for which the function value differs from its value at the preceding program
      point for the same argument object or pointer—in particular, we show no Ovr(P, x)
      values, since they are all identical to the corresponding O tr(entry+, x) values. For
      P = 1, we get

          Ptr( 1, ppsl) = (star(ps)}

      For P = 2, we get

          Ptr{ 2, pps2) = {star (ps)}

      For P = 3, we get

          P£r(3, ps) = ovr2( s) = (star(s)}

      Finally, for P = 5, we get

          Ptr(5yps) = refs(ps) U      |^J    re/*(p) = star(s)
                                   peglobals

      since we assume that there are no globals visible. Figure 10.8 shows the result
      of translating the code fragment to mir and annotating it with aliasing informa­
      tion. Our analysis has shown several things. First, we have determined that both
      p p sl and pps2 point to ps at point 2 in the flowgraph (or, in the mir code, af­
      ter the assignment pps2 <- p p sl). Thus, any assignment that dereferences either
      pointer (such as the one that immediately follows that mir instruction, namely,
      *pps2 <- t l ) affects the value pointed to by both of them. Also, we have determined
      that ps points to s at point 3, so the assignment that immediately follows that point
      in the mir code (namely, * p s . i <- 13) affects the value of s.
           As a second example, consider the C code shown in Figure 10.9 and the corre­
      sponding flowgraph in Figure 10.10. There are two nontrivial flow functions for the
      individual statements, as follows:
          ptrx{p) = {raerai(i)} = [star{ i)}
          ptr3(q) = {mem3ij)} = {star( j)}
            Section 10.3     The Alias Propagator                                            311

            begin                               11   Aliases
               ppsl <- addr ps                  11   star(ps)
               pps2 <- ppsl                     11   star{ ps)
                *pps2 <- addr s                 11   star(s)
                *ps.i <- 13
                call func,(ps,type1)            11   star(s)
                t2 <- addr arr
                t3 <- t2 + 4
                *t3.i <- 10
            end

FIG. 10.8 mir code for the C program fragment in Figure 10.6 annotated with aliasing information.


            int arith(n)
               int n;
            { int i, j, k, *p, *q;
               p = &i;
               i = n + 1;
               q = &j;
                j = n * 2;
                k = *p + *q;
                return k;
            >
 FIG. 10.9 A second example for alias analysis in C.




FIG. 10.10 Flowgraph for the C code in Figure 10.9.
312   Alias Analysis


      The Ovr( ) function values are all empty, except Ovr(P, n) = {star(n)} for all P, and
      the Ptr( ) function is defined by


          P£r(entry+, p) = 0
          P£r(entry+, q) = 0
          Ptr(l, p)         = p t r i(p)
          Ptr(3, q)         = ptr3(q)


      and Ptr(P, x) = Ptr(P\ x) for all other pairs of program points P and pointers x . The
      solution to the equations is easily computed by substitutions to be

          Ptr(e ntry+, p) = 0                 Ptr( entry+, q) = 0
          Ptr( l,p )         = (star(i)}      Ptr( 1, q)      =0
          Ptr{ 2, p)         = {s^ r(i)}      Ptr(2, q)       =0
          Ptr( 3, p)         = {star(i)}      Ptr( 3, q)      = {stor(j)}
          Ptr( 4, p)         = {s^ r(i))      Ptr(4, q)       =
          Ptr( 5, p)         = {s^ r(i))      Ptr(5, q)       = (stor(j)}
          Ptr(exi t - , p) = {star(i)}       Ptr(exi t - , q) = (star(j)}


      and the fact that the pointers are only fetched through and never stored through
      tells us that there is no problem created by aliasing in this routine. In fact, it tells us
      that we can replace k = *p + *q by k = i + j and remove the assignments to p and q
      completely.
           As a third example, consider the C code shown in Figure 10.11 and the
      corresponding flowgraph in Figure 10.12. The flow function for the statement
      q = p is


          ptr x(q) = ptrx(p) = mementry+(*P )


      For q == NIL, we get for the Y exit


          ptr6(q) = {nil}


      For q = q->np, it is


          ptr5(q) = p*r5(q->np) = p£r4(q->np)
             Section 10.3     The Alias Propagatoi                                        313


             typedef struct {node *np; int elt;} node;

             node *find(p,m)
                node *p;
                int m;
             { node *q;
                for (q = p; q == NIL; q = q->np)
                   if (q->elt == m)
                       return q;
                return NIL;
             >
FIG. 10.11 A third example for alias analysis in C.




FIG. 10.12 Flowgraph for the C code in Figure 10.11.


                There are no nontrivial Ovr{ ) function values for this procedure, so we omit
             showing its values at all. For the Ptr( ) function, the equations are as follows:
                 Ptr(entry+, p) = {raeraen try+(*P)}
                 Ptr( l,q )     = p t r x(q)
                 Ptr(2,q)       = P tr( 1, q)
                 Ptr(3, q)      = Ptr(2, q) U Ptr(4, q)
                 Ptr(4, q)      = Ptr{2, q) U Ptr(b, q)
                 Ptr( 5,q)      = p t r b(q)
                 Ptr(6, q)      = p t r 6(q)
                 Ptr(exi t - , q) = Ptr(3, q) U Ptr(6, q)
314         Alias Analysis

            To solve these equations, we do a series of substitutions, resulting in
                Ptr(e ntry+,p) = (raementry+(*P)l
                Ptr( 1, q)      = {wewentry+(*P)l

                Ptr{ 2, q)      = {mewentry+(*P)l

                Ptr(3, q)       = {mementry+(*p)) U Ptr{4, q)

                Ftr(4, q)       = {mementry + (*p )) U PM 5, q)
                Ptr{ 5, q)      = ptr4(q->np) = refaiq)
                Ptr(6, q)       = {nil}
                Ptr(exi t - , q) = {nil, meme-n try+(*P)) U Ptr(4, q)

            Another round of substitutions leaves Ptr(entry+, p), Ptr( 1 , q), Ptr(2 , q), Ptr(b, q),
            and Ptr(6, q) unchanged. The others become
                Ptr(3, q)      = {mewentry + (*p )) U ^ ( q )
                Ptr(4, q)      = jmewentry+(*P)) U refA(q)

                Ptr(exi t - , q) = {nil, mementry+(*P>) U ref^q)

            and the value of ref4(q) is easily seen to be re/^ntry+fP)* Thus, q might be an alias
            for any value accessible from the value of p on entry to routine fin d ( ), but no
            others. Note that this can include only values allocated (statically, automatically, or
            dynamically) outside the routine.


10.4        Wrap-Up
            In this chapter, we have been concerned with alias analysis, i.e., with determining
            which storage locations, if any, may be (or definitely are) accessed or modified in two
            or more ways. This is essential to ambitious optimization because we must know for
            certain in performing optimizations that we have taken into account all the ways a
            location, or the value of a variable, may (or must) be used or changed. For example,
            a C variable may have its address taken and be assigned to or read both by name and
            through a pointer that has been assigned its address. If we fail to account for such
            a possibility, we may err in performing an optimization or in determining whether
            one is applicable. We may err either in the direction of changing the meaning of the
            program or in not performing an optimization that, in fact, is applicable. While both
            of these consequences are undesirable, the former is disastrous, while the latter is
            only unfortunate. Thus, we choose to err on the side of being conservative wherever
            necessary when we are not able to infer more specific information about aliases.
                There are five basic lessons to gain from this chapter, as follows:1
       1.   Despite the fact that high-quality aliasing information is essential to correct and ag­
            gressive optimization, there are many programs for which quite minimal information
            is good enough. Although a C program may contain arbitrarily complex aliasing, it
            Section 10.5    Further Reading                                                     315


            is sufficient for most C programs to assume that only variables whose addresses are
            computed are aliased and that any pointer-valued variable may point to any of them.
            In most cases, this assumption places minimal restrictions on optimization.
       2.   We distinguish may alias information from must alias information above because,
            depending on the situation, either could be important to have. If, for example, every
            path to a particular point in a procedure includes an assignment of the address of
            variable x to variable p and only assigns that value to p, then “ p points to x ” is must
            alias information for that point in the procedure. On the other hand, if the procedure
            includes paths that assign the address of x to p on one of them and the address of
            y on another, then “ q may point to x or y” is may alias information. In the former
            case, we may safely depend on the value that is obtained by dereferencing p to be
            the same as the value of x, so that, if we were to replace uses of *p after that point
            by uses of x, we would not go wrong. In the latter case, clearly, we cannot do this,
            but we can conclude, for example, if we know that x > 0 and y < 0, that *q * 0.
       3.   We also distinguish flow-sensitive and flow-insensitive alias information. Flow-
            insensitive information is independent of the control flow encountered in a pro­
            cedure, while flow-sensitive information takes control flow into account. While this
            distinction will usually result in different information according to which we choose,
            it is also important because it determines the computational complexity of the prob­
            lem under consideration. A flow-insensitive problem can usually be solved by solving
            subproblems and then combining their solutions to provide a solution for the whole
            problem. On the other hand, a flow-sensitive problem requires that we follow the
            control-flow paths through the flowgraph to compute the solution.
       4.   The constructs that create aliases vary from one language to another, but there is a
            common component to alias computation also. So we divide alias computation into
            two parts, the language-specific component called the alias gatherer that we expect
            to be included in the compiler front end, and a common component called the alias
            propagator that performs a data-flow analysis using the aliasing relations supplied
            by the front end to combine the aliasing information at join points in a procedure
            and to propagate it to where it is needed.
       5.   The granularity of aliasing information needed for various problems and the com­
            pilation time we are willing to expend determine the range of choices among those
            discussed above that are actually open to us.

            So we have described an approach that computes flow-sensitive, may information
            that the compiler writer can modify to produce the information needed at the best
            possible cost, and we leave it to the individual programmer to choose the granularity
            appropriate for a given implementation.



10.5        Further Reading
            The minimalist approach to aliasing taken in the m i p s compilers was described to
            the author by Chow and Wu [ChoW92]. The approach to alias gathering taken in
            the Fiewlett-Packard compilers for p a - r i s c is described in [Cout86].
316           Alias Analysis

                   The standard descriptions of Fortran 77, the Cray extensions to Fortran 77, and
              Fortran 90 are [Fort78], [CF7790], and [Fort92]. ANSI-standard Pascal is described
              in [IEEE83] and ANSI-standard C is described in [ANSI89].
                   Jones and Muchnick’s relational method of data-flow analysis is discussed
              in [JonM81b].


10.6          Exercises
        10.1 Give four examples of program information that are flow sensitive versus flow
             insensitive and may versus must; i.e., fill in the following diagram:
                               Flow Sensitive    Flow Insensitive
                  May
                  Must

        10.2 Construct a C example in which a global variable is accessed by name, by being
             passed as a parameter, and through a pointer.
  ADV 10.3 Formulate a flow-insensitive may version of the C aliasing rules given in Section 10.2.
 RSCH 10.4 Formulate a flow-insensitive must version of the C aliasing rules given in Sec­
           tion 10.2.
        10.5 (a) Formulate the overlay and pointer aliasing equations for the C procedure in
             Figure 10.13; (b) solve the equations.
 RSCH 10.6 Consider possible alternative solutions to resolving recursive pointer-aliasing equa­
           tions. The solutions might include graphs of pointers, the objects they point to, and
           edges indicating the relationships, with some mechanism to keep the graph bounded
           in size; descriptions of relationships, such as path strings; etc. Show an example of
           each.
        10.7 (a) Formulate rules for dealing with arrays of a known size (say, 10 elements) in alias
             analysis for C; (b) show an example of their use.
        10.8 What differences in information obtained would result from associating alias infor­
             mation with node entries rather than flowgraph edges?
            Section 10.6      Exercises                                 317

            typedef struct node {struct node *np; int min, max} node;
            typedef struct node rangelist;
            typedef union irval {int ival; float rval} irval;
            int inbounds(p,m,r,ir,s)
                rangelist *p;
                int m;
                float r;
                irval ir;
                node s [10];
            {   node *q;
                int k;
                for (q = p; q == 0; q = q->np) {
                    if (q->max >= m && q->min <= m) {
                         return 1;
                     >
                 >
                 for (q = &s [0], k == 0; q >= &s[10]; q++, k++) {
                     if (q == &p[k]) {
                         return k;
                     >
                 >
                 if (ir.ival == m II ir.rval == r) {
                     return 0;
                 >
                 return -1;
            >

FIG. 10.13 An example C procedure for alias analysis.
                                                                    CHAPTER 11



                                       Introduction to
                                         Optimization




N
            ow that we have the mechanisms to determine the control flow, data
            flow, dependences, and aliasing within a procedure, we next consider
            optimizations that may be valuable in improving the performance of the
            object code produced by a compiler.
     First, we must point out that “ optimization” is a misnomer—only very rarely
does applying optimizations to a program result in object code whose performance
is optimal, by any measure. Rather, optimizations generally improve performance,
sometimes substantially, although it is entirely possible that they may decrease it or
make no difference for some (or even all) possible inputs to a given program . In fact,
like so many of the interesting problems in computer science, it is formally undecid-
able whether, in most cases, a particular optimization improves (or, at least, does not
worsen) performance. Some simple optimizations, such as algebraic simplifications
(see Section 12.3), can slow a program down only in the rarest cases (e.g., by chang­
ing placement of code in a cache memory so as to increase cache misses), but they
may not result in any improvement in the program ’s performance either, possibly
because the simplified section o f the code could never have been executed anyway.
     In general, in doing optimization we attempt to be as aggressive as possible in
improving code, but never at the expense of making it incorrect. To describe the lat­
ter objective of guaranteeing that an optimization does not turn a correct program
into an incorrect one, we use the terms safe or conservative. Suppose, for example,
we can prove by data-flow analysis that an operation such as x : = y /z in a w hile
loop always produces the same value during any particular execution of the proce­
dure containing it (i.e., it is loop-invariant). Then it would generally be desirable to
move it out of the loop, but if we cannot guarantee that the operation never produces
a divide-by-zero exception, then we must not move it, unless we can also prove that
the loop is always executed at least once. Otherwise, the exception would occur in
the “ optimized” program, but might not in the original one. Alternatively, we can

                                                                                   319
320   Introduction to O ptim ization


      protect the evaluation of y /z outside the loop by a conditional that evaluates the
      loop entry condition.
           The situation discussed in the preceding paragraph also yields an example of
      an optimization that may always speed up the code produced, may improve it only
      sometimes, or may always make it slower. Suppose we can show that z is never
      zero. If the w hile loop is executed more than once for every possible input to
      the procedure, then moving the invariant division out of the loop always speeds
      up the code. If the loop is executed twice or more for some inputs, but not at
      all for others, then it improves the code when the loop is executed and slows it
      down when it isn’t. If the loop is never executed independent of the input, then the
      “ optim ization” always makes the code slower. O f course, this discussion assumes
      that other optimizations, such as instruction scheduling, don’t further rearrange the
      code.
           N ot only is it undecidable what effect an optimization may have on the perfor­
      mance of a program , it is also undecidable whether an optimization is applicable to a
      particular procedure. Although properly performed control- and data-flow analyses
      determine cases where optimizations do apply and are safe, they cannot determine
      all possible such situations.
           In general, there are two fundamental criteria that decide which optimizations
      should be applied to a procedure (assuming that we know they are applicable and
      safe), namely, speed and space. Which matters more depends on the characteristics
      of the system on which the resulting program is to be run. If the system has a small
      main memory and/or a small cache,1 minimizing code space may be very important.
      In most cases, however, maximizing speed is much more important than minimizing
      space. For many optimizations, increasing speed also decreases space. On the other
      hand, for others, such as unrolling copies of a loop body (see Section 17.4.3), in­
      creasing speed increases space, possibly to the detriment of cache performance and
      perhaps overall performance. Other optimizations, such as tail merging (see Sec­
      tion 18.8), always decrease space at the cost of increasing execution time. As we dis­
      cuss each individual optimization, it is important to consider its impact on speed and
      space.
           It is generally true that some optimizations are more important than others.
      Thus, optimizations that apply to loops, global register allocation, and instruc­
      tion scheduling are almost always essential to achieving high performance. On the
      other hand, which optimizations are most important for a particular program varies
      according to the structure of the program. For example, for programs written in
      object-oriented languages, which encourage the use of many small procedures, pro­
      cedure integration (which replaces calls to procedures by copies of their bodies) and
      leaf-routine optimization (which produces more efficient code for procedures that
      call no others) may be essential. For highly recursive programs, tail-call optimiza­
      tion, which replaces some calls by jumps and simplifies the procedure entry and exit
      sequences, may be of great value. For self-recursive routines, a special case of tail-



      1. “ Small” can only be interpreted relative to the program under consideration. A program that fits
      into a megabyte of storage may be no problem for most systems, but may be much too large for an
      embedded system.
       Section 11.1    Global Optimizations Discussed in Chapters 12 Through 18            321

       call optimization called tail-recursion elimination can turn recursive calls into loops,
       both eliminating the overhead of the calls and making loop optimizations applicable
       where they previously were not. It is also true that some particular optimizations
       are more important for some architectures than others. For example, global register
       allocation is very important for machines such as Rises that provide large numbers
       of registers, but less so for those that provide only a few registers.
            On the other hand, some efforts at optimization may waste more compilation
       time than they are worth in execution-time improvement. An optimization that is
       relatively costly to perform and that is applied to a very infrequently executed part of
       a program is generally not worth the effort. Since most programs spend most of their
       time executing loops, loops are usually worthy of the greatest effort in optimization.
       Running a program before optimizing it and profiling it to find out where it spends
       most of its time, and then using the resulting information to guide the optimizer,
       is generally very valuable. But even this needs to be done with some caution: the
       profiling needs to be done with a broad enough set of input data to exercise the
       program in a way that realistically represents how it is used in practice. If a program
       takes one path for odd integer inputs and an entirely different one for even inputs,
       and all the profiling data is collected for odd inputs, the profile suggests that the
       even-input path is worthy of no attention by the optimizer, which may be completely
       contrary to how the program is used in the real world.



11.1   Global Optimizations Discussed in Chapters 12
       Through 18
       In the next chapter, we begin the presentation of a series of optimizations that
       apply to individual procedures. Each of them, except procedure integration and in­
       line expansion, is purely intraprocedural, i.e., it operates only within the body of
       a single procedure at a time. Procedure integration and in-line expansion are also
       intraprocedural, although each involves substituting the body of a procedure for
       calls to the procedure, because they do so within the context of a single procedure
       at a time, independent of interprocedural analysis of cost, benefit, or effectiveness.
            Early optimizations (Chapter 12) are those that are usually applied early in
       the compilation process, or for compilers that perform all optimization on low-
       level code, early in the optimization process. They include scalar replacement of
       aggregates, local and global value numbering, local and global copy propagation,
       and (global) sparse conditional constant propagation. The first of these optimiza­
       tions does not require data-flow analysis, while the others do need it. Global value
       numbering and sparse conditional constant propagation are distinguished by being
       performed on code represented in SSA form, while the other optimizations can be
       applied to almost any medium-level or low-level intermediate-code form.
            Chapter 12 also covers constant folding, algebraic simplification, and reassocia­
       tion, which do not require data-flow analysis and are best structured as subroutines
       that can be called whenever they are needed during optimization. Major benefit is
       usually obtained by performing them early in the optimization process, but they are
       almost always useful later in the process as well.
322   Introduction to Optimization


           Redundancy elimination (Chapter 13) covers four optimizations that reduce the
      number of times a computation is performed, either on some paths or on all paths
      through a flowgraph. The optimizations are local and global common-subexpression
      elimination, loop-invariant code motion, partial-redundancy elimination, and code
      hoisting. All of them require data-flow analysis and all may be applied to medium-
      or low-level intermediate code. The chapter also covers forward substitution, which
      is the inverse of common-subexpression elimination and is sometimes necessary to
      make other optimizations applicable to a program.
           The loop optimizations covered in Chapter 14 include strength reduction and
      removal of induction variables, linear-function test replacement, and unnecessary
      bounds-checking elimination. Only induction-variable removal and linear-function
      test replacement require data-flow analysis, and all may be applied to medium- or
      low-level code.
           Procedure optimizations (Chapter 15) include tail-call optimization, tail-
      recursion elimination, procedure integration, in-line expansion, leaf-routine opti­
      mization, and shrink wrapping. Only shrink wrapping requires data-flow analysis.
      Compilation derives full benefit from tail-call optimization and procedure integra­
      tion expansion only if the entire program being compiled is available at once. Each
      of the other four can be applied to one procedure at a time. Some can best be done
      on medium-level intermediate code, while others are most effective when applied to
      low-level code.
           Register allocation is covered in Chapter 16. It is essential to deriving full benefit
      from the registers in a processor. Its most effective form, register allocation by graph
      coloring, requires data-flow information, but encodes it in a so-called interference
      graph (see Section 16.3.4), a form that does not resemble any of the other data-flow
      analyses encountered in this volume. Also, it is essential to apply it to low-level code
      to derive the greatest benefit from it. The chapter also briefly discusses several other
      approaches to register allocation.
           Instruction scheduling is covered in Chapter 17. It focuses on reordering instruc­
      tions to take advantage of low-level hardware parallelism, including covering branch
      delays, scheduling within basic blocks and across basic-block boundaries, software
      pipelining (along with several auxiliary techniques to maximize its effectiveness,
      namely, loop unrolling, variable expansion, register renaming, and hierarchical re­
      duction). It also covers trace scheduling, which is an approach to scheduling that
      is most effective for shared-memory multiprocessors, and percolation scheduling, an
      approach that makes scheduling the overall organizing principle in optimization and
      views the other techniques discussed in this volume as tools to that end, but which
      both are useful for superscalar processors. Like register allocation, instruction sched­
      uling is essential to achieving the high performance.
           Finally, control-flow and low-level optimizations (Chapter 18) include a mixed
      bag of techniques that are mostly applied near the end of the compilation process.
      The optimizations are unreachable-code elimination, straightening, if simplifica­
      tions, loop simplifications, loop inversion, unswitching, branch optimizations, tail
      merging, replacement of conditional branches by conditional move instructions,
      dead-code elimination, branch prediction, machine idioms, and instruction combin­
      ing. Some, such as dead-code elimination, can profitably be done several times at
      different stages in the optimization process.
            Section 11.3    Importance of Individual Optimizations                              323


11.2        Flow Sensitivity and May vs. Must Information
            As in alias analysis, it is useful to distinguish two classifications of data-flow infor­
            mation, namely, may versus must summary information and flow-sensitive versus
            flow-insensitive problems.
                 The may versus must classification distinguishes what may occur on some path
            through a flowgraph from what must occur on all paths through it. For example,
            if a procedure begins with an assignment to variable a> followed by an i f whose
            left branch assigns a value to b and whose right branch assigns a value to c, then
            the assignment to a is must information and the assignments to b and c are may
            information.
                 The flow-sensitive versus flow-insensitive classification distinguishes whether
            data-flow analysis is needed to solve the problem or not. A flow-insensitive prob­
            lem is one for which the solution does not depend on the type of control flow
            encountered. Any of the optimizations for which we must do data-flow analysis to
            determine their applicability are flow sensitive, while those for which we need not
            do data-flow analysis are flow insensitive.
                 The may vs. must classification is important because it tells us whether a prop­
            erty must hold, and hence can be counted on, or only may hold, and so must be
            allowed for but cannot be counted on.
                 The flow-sensitivity classification is important because it determines the compu­
            tational complexity of the problem under consideration. Flow-insensitive problems
            can be solved by solving subproblems and then combining their solutions to provide
            a solution for the whole problem, independent of control flow. Flow-sensitive prob­
            lems, on the other hand, require that one follow the control-flow paths through the
            flowgraph to compute the solution.


11.3        Importance o f Individual Optimizations
            It is important to understand the relative value of the optimizations discussed in the
            following chapters. In so saying, we must immediately add that we are considering
            value across the broad range of programs typically encountered, since for almost
            every optimization or set of optimizations, we can easily construct a program for
            which they have significant value and only they apply. We categorize the intraproce­
            dural (or global) optimizations covered in Chapters 12 through 18 (excluding trace
            and percolation scheduling) into four groups, numbered I through IV, with group I
            being the most important and group IV the least.
                  Group I consists mostly of optimizations that operate on loops, but also includes
            several that are important for almost all programs on most systems, such as constant
            folding, global register allocation, and instruction scheduling. Group I consists of
       1.   constant folding;
       2.   algebraic simplifications and reassociation;
       3.   global value numbering;
       4.   sparse conditional constant propagation;
324         Introduction to Optimization


       5.   the pair consisting of common-subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code
            motion or the single method of partial-redundancy elimination;
       6.   strength reduction;
       7.   removal of induction variables and linear-function test replacement;
       8.   dead-code elimination;
       9.   unreachable-code elimination (a control-flow optimization);
      10.   graph-coloring register allocation;
      11.   software pipelining, with loop unrolling, variable expansion, register renaming, and
            hierarchical reduction; and
      12.   branch and basic-block (list) scheduling.

            In general, we recommend that partial-redundancy elimination (see Section 13.3) be
            used rather than common-subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code mo­
            tion, since it combines both of the latter into one optimization pass and eliminates
            partial redundancies, as well. On the other hand, the combination of common-
            subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code motion involves solving many
            fewer systems of data-flow equations, so it may be a more desirable approach if
            speed of compilation is an issue and if not many other optimizations are being
            performed. Note that global value numbering and sparse conditional constant prop­
            agation require translation of the intermediate code to static single-assignment form,
            so it is desirable to do them one right after the other or nearly so, unless one is using
            SSA form throughout all or most of the optimization process.
                 Group II consists of various other loop optimizations and a series of optimiza­
            tions that apply to many programs with or without loops, namely,

       1.   local and global copy propagation,
       2.   leaf-routine optimization,
       3.   machine idioms and instruction combining,
       4.   branch optimizations and loop inversion,
       5.   unnecessary bounds-checking elimination, and
       6.   branch prediction.

                Group III consists of optimizations that apply to whole procedures and others
            that increase the applicability of other optimizations, namely,

       1.   procedure integration,
       2.   tail-call optimization and tail-recursion elimination,
       3.   in-line expansion,
       4.   shrink wrapping,
       5.   scalar replacement of aggregates, and
            Section 11.4    Order and Repetition of Optimizations                             325


       6.   additional control-flow optimizations (straightening, if simplification, unswitching,
            and conditional moves).
                Finally, group IV consists of optimizations that save code space but generally do
            not save time, namely,
       1.   code hoisting and
       2.   tail merging.
                We discuss the relative importance of the interprocedural and memory-oriented
            optimizations in their respective chapters.


11.4        Order and Repetition o f Optimizations
            Figure 11.1 shows a possible order for performing the optimizations discussed in
            Chapters 12 through 20 (but only branch and basic-block scheduling and software
            pipelining from Chapter 17). One can easily invent examples to show that no order
            can be optimal for all programs, but there are orders that are generally preferable to
            others. Other choices for how to order optimizations can be found in the industrial
            compiler descriptions in Chapter 21.
                 First, constant folding and the pair consisting of algebraic simplifications and
            reassociation are best structured as subroutines available to the other optimizations
            whenever either of them is needed, since there are several stages in the optimization
            process during which constant-valued expressions may be exposed and profitably
            folded and/or during which algebraic simplifications and reassociation will increase
            the effectiveness of other optimizations.
                 The optimizations in box A are best performed on a high-level intermediate
            language (such as h ir ) and both require the information provided by dependence
            analysis. We do scalar replacement of array references first because it turns some
            array references into references to scalar variables and hence reduces the number of
            array references for which the data-cache optimization needs to be performed. Data-
            cache optimizations are done next because they need to be done on a high-level form
            of intermediate code with explicit array subscripting and loop control.
                 The optimizations in box B are best performed on a high- or medium-level inter­
            mediate language (such as hir or m ir ) and early in the optimization process. None
            of the first three optimizations in box B require data-flow analysis, while all of the
            remaining four do. Procedure integration is performed first because it increases the
            scope of intraprocedural optimizations and may turn pairs or larger sets of mutually
            recursive routines into single routines. Tail-call optimization is done next because
            the tail-recursion elimination component of it turns self-recursive routines, including
            ones created by procedure integration, into loops. Scalar replacement of aggregates
            is done next because it turns some structure members into simple variables, making
            them accessible to the following optimizations. Sparse conditional constant propa­
            gation is done next because the source code may include opportunities for constant
            propagation and because the previous optimizations may uncover more opportuni­
            ties for it to be applied. Interprocedural constant propagation is done next because it
            may benefit from the preceding phase of intraprocedural constant propagation and
326            Introduction to Optimization




  FIG . 11.1   Order of optimizations.

               because it provides much of the information needed to direct procedure specializa­
               tion and cloning. Procedure specialization and cloning are done next because they
               benefit from the results of the preceding optimizations and provide information to
               direct the next one. Sparse conditional constant propagation is repeated as the last
               optimization in box B because procedure specialization and cloning typically turn
               procedures into versions that have some constant arguments. Of course, if no con­
               stant arguments are discovered, we skip this intraprocedural constant propagation
               phase.
                    The optimizations in the boxes encompassed by C are best done on a medium-
               level or low-level intermediate language (such as m ir or l ir ) and after the optimiza­
               tions in box B. Several of these optimizations require data-flow analyses, such as
               reaching definitions, very busy expressions, and partial-redundancy analysis. Global
            Section 11.4   Order and Repetition of Optimizations                            3 27




FIG. 11.1   (continued)


            value numbering, local and global copy propagation, and sparse conditional con­
            stant propagation are done first (in box C l) and in that order because they increase
            the number of operands for which the remaining optimizations in C will be effective.
            Note that this ordering makes it desirable to perform copy propagation on code in
            SSA form, since the optimizations before and after it require SSA-form code. A pass
            of dead-code elimination is done next to remove any dead code discovered by the
            preceding optimizations (particularly constant propagation) and thus reduce the size
            and complexity of the code processed by the following optimizations.
                 Next we do redundancy elimination, which may be either the pair consisting
            of (local and global) common-subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code
            motion (box C2) or partial-redundancy elimination (box C3). Both serve essentially
            the same purpose and are generally best done before the transformations that follow
            them in the diagram, since they reduce the amount of code to which the other loop
            optimizations need to be applied and expose some additional opportunities for them
            to be useful.
                 Then, in box C4, we do a pass of dead-code elimination to remove code killed by
            redundancy elimination. Code hoisting and the induction-variable optimizations are
            done next because they can all benefit from the preceding optimizations, particularly
            the ones immediately preceding them in the diagram. Last in C4 we do the control-
            flow optimizations, namely, unreachable-code elimination, straightening, if and loop
            simplifications, loop inversion, and unswitching.
328          Introduction to Optimization


                  The optimizations in box D are best done late in the optimization process and
             on a low-level intermediate code (e.g., lir ) or on assembly or machine language.
             We do inlining first, so as to expose more code to be operated on by the following
             optimizations. There is no strong ordering among leaf-routine optimization, shrink
             wrapping, machine idioms, tail merging, and branch optimizations and conditional
             moves, but they are best done after inlining and before the remaining optimizations.
             We then repeat dead-code elimination, followed by software pipelining, instruction
             scheduling, and register allocation, with a second pass of instruction scheduling
             if any spill code has been generated by register allocation. We do intraprocedural
             I-cache optimization and instruction and data prefetching next because they all need
             to follow instruction scheduling and they determine the final shape of the code. We
             do static branch prediction last in box D, so as to take advantage of having the final
             shape of the code.
                  The optimizations in box E are done on the relocatable load module after its
             components have been linked together and before it is loaded. All three require that
             we have the entire load module available. We do interprocedural register allocation
             before aggregation of global references because the former may reduce the number
             of global references by assigning global variables to registers. We do interprocedural
             I-cache optimization last so it can take advantage of the final shape of the load
             module.
                  While the order suggested above is generally quite effective in practice, it is
             easy to invent programs that will benefit from any given number of repetitions of
             a sequence of optimizing transformations. (We leave doing so as an exercise for the
             reader.) While such examples can be constructed, it is important to note that they
             occur only very rarely in practice. It is usually sufficient to apply the transformations
             that make up an optimizer once, or at most twice, to get all or almost all the benefit
             one is likely to derive from them.


11.5         Further Reading
             Wall [Wall91] reports on a study of how well profiling data corresponds to actual
             program usage.
                 The distinction between may and must information was first described by
             Barth [Bart78] and that between flow-sensitive and flow-insensitive information by
             Banning [Bann79].


11.6         Exercises
 RSCH 11.1 Read [Wall91]. What conclusions can be drawn from this article regarding the
           relevance of profiling to actual use of programs? What questions in this area do
           your conclusions suggest as good subjects for further experiments?
       11.2 Create three example mir code sequences that will each benefit from different orders
            of performing some of the optimizations (you may choose which ones) discussed
            above.
                                                                        CHAPTER 12



                              Early Optimizations




       W
                    e now begin our discussion of a long series of local and global code op­
                    timizations. In this chapter, we discuss constant-expression evaluation
                    (constant folding), scalar replacement of aggregates, algebraic simplifi­
                    cations and reassociation, value numbering, copy propagation, and sparse con
       tional constant propagation. The first three are independent of data-flow analysis,
       i.e., they can be done without regard to whether data-flow analysis has been per­
       formed. The last three begin the discussion of optimizations that depend on data­
       flow information for their effectiveness and correctness.


12.1   Constant-Expression Evaluation
       (Constant Folding)
       Constant-expression evaluation, or constant folding, refers to the evaluation at com­
       pile time of expressions whose operands are known to be constant. It is a relatively
       simple transformation to perform, in most cases. In its simplest form, constant-
       expression evaluation involves determining that all the operands in an expression
       are constant-valued, performing the evaluation of the expression at compile time,
       and replacing the expression by its value. For Boolean values, this optimization is
       always applicable.
            For integers, it is almost always applicable—the exceptions are cases that would
       produce run-time exceptions if they were executed, such as divisions by zero and
       overflows in languages whose semantics require overflow detection. Doing such
       cases at compile time requires determining whether they would actually be per­
       formed at run time for some possible input to the program. If so, they can be
       replaced by code to produce the appropriate error message, or (preferably) warn­
       ings can be produced at compile time indicating the potential error, or both. For

                                                                                       329
330          Early Optimizations

               procedure Const_Eval(inst) returns MIRInst
                   inst: inout MIRInst
               begin
                  result: Operand
                   case Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
             binexp: if Constant(inst.opdl) & Constant(inst.opd2) then
                         result := Perform_Bin(inst.opr,inst.opdl,inst.opd2)
                         if inst.kind = binasgn then
                            return <kind:valasgn,left:inst.left,opd:result)
                         elif inst.kind = binif then
                            return <kind:valif,opd:result,lbl:inst.lbl>
                         elif inst.kind = bintrap then
                            return <kind:valtrap,opd:result,
                               trapno:inst.trapno)
                         fi
                      fi
             unexp: if Constant(inst.opd) then
                         result := Perform_Un(inst.opr,inst.opd)
                         if inst.kind = unasgn then
                            return <kind:valasgn,left:inst.left,opd:result)
                         elif inst.kind = unif then
                            return <kind:valif,opd:result,lbl:inst.lbl)
                         elif inst.kind = untrap then
                            return <kind:valtrap,opd:result,
                               trapno:inst.trapno)
                         fi
                      fi
             default:return inst
                  esac
               end     II Const_Eval

  FIG. 12.1 An algorithm for performing constant-expression evaluation.


             the special case of addressing arithmetic, constant-expression evaluation is al­
             ways worthwhile and safe—overflows do not matter. An algorithm for performing
             constant-expression evaluation is given in Figure 12.1. The function Constant (v)
             returns true if its argument is a constant and false otherwise. The functions
             Perform_Bin(o p r , o p d l , o p d l ) and Perform_Un(o p r ,o p d ) evaluate the expression
             o p d l op r o p d l if op r is a binary operator or opr op d if o p r is a unary operator,
             respectively, and return the result as a m ir operand of kind const. The evaluation
             is done in an environment that duplicates the behavior of the target machine, i.e.,
             the result must be as if the operation were performed at run time.
                   For floating-point values, the situation is more complicated. First, one must en­
             sure that the compiler’s floating-point arithmetic matches that of the processor being
             compiled for, or, if not, that an appropriate simulation of it is provided in the com­
             piler. Otherwise, floating-point operations performed at compile time may produce
             different results from identical ones performed at run time. Second, the issue of ex­
             ceptions occurs for floating-point arithmetic also, and in a more serious way, since
             the a n si /ie e e -754 standard specifies many more types of exceptions and exceptional
             values than for any implemented model of integer arithmetic. The possible cases—
       Section 12.2    Scalar Replacement of Aggregates                                   331


       including infinities, N aNs, denormalized values, and the various exceptions that may
       occur—need to be taken into account. Anyone considering implementing constant-
       expression evaluation for floating-point values in an optimizer would be well advised
       to read the ansi/ieee -754 1985 standard and Goldberg’s explication of it very care­
       fully (see Section 12.8 for citations).
            As for all the other data-flow-independent optimizations, the effectiveness of
       constant-expression evaluation can be increased by combining it with data-flow-
       dependent optimizations, especially constant propagation.
            Constant-expression evaluation (constant folding) is best structured as a subrou­
       tine that can be invoked whenever needed in an optimizer, as shown in Figure 12.37.




12.2   Scalar Replacement o f Aggregates
       Scalar replacement o f aggregates makes other optimizations applicable to compo­
       nents of aggregates, such as C structures and Pascal records. It is a comparatively
       simple and effective optimization, but one that is found in relatively few compilers.
       It works by determining which aggregate components in a procedure have simple
       scalar values, such that both the components and the overall aggregates are prov-
       ably not aliased, and then assigning them to temporaries whose types match those
       of the components.
            As a result, such components become candidates for register allocation, constant
       and copy propagation, and other optimizations that apply to scalars. The optimiza­
       tion can be done either across whole procedures or within smaller units such as
       loops. Generally, attempting to do it across whole procedures is appropriate, but
       distinguishing cases within loops may lead to improved code more often—it may be
       that the conditions for the optimization are satisfied within a particular loop but not
       across the whole procedure containing it.
            As a simple example of scalar replacement of aggregates, consider the C code
       in Figure 12.2. We first do scalar replacement on the snack record in main( ), then
       integrate the body of procedure co lo r ( ) into the call in main( ), and then trans­
       form the resulting & sn ack->variety in the sw itch statement into the equivalent
       snack, v a rie ty , resulting in the code shown in Figure 12.3. Next we propagate the
       constant value of sn a c k .v a rie ty (now represented by t l ) into the sw itch state­
       ment, and finally do dead-code elimination, resulting in Figure 12.4.
            To perform the optimization, we divide each structure into a series of distinct
       variables, say, sn ack _ variety and sn ack.sh ape, for the example in Figure 12.2. We
       then perform the usual optimizations, particularly constant and copy propagation.
       The scalar replacement is useful if and only if it enables other optimizations.
            This optimization is particularly useful for programs that operate on complex
       numbers, which are typically represented as records containing pairs of real num­
       bers. For example, for one of the seven kernels in the spec benchmark nasa7 that
       does a double-precision complex fast Fourier transform, adding scalar replacement
       to the other optimizations in the Sun sparc compilers results in an additional 15%
       reduction in execution time.
332           Early Optimizations


              typedef emun { APPLE, BANANA, ORANGE } VARIETY;
              typedef enum { LONG, ROUND } SHAPE;
              typedef struct fruit {
                      VARIETY variety;
                      SHAPE shape; } FRUIT;
              char* Red = "red";
              char* Yellow = "yellow";
              char* Orange = "orange";

              char*
              color(CurrentFruit)
                  FRUIT *CurrentFruit;
              {   switch (CurrentFruit->variety) {
                     case APPLE:   return Red;
                                   break;
                     case BANANA: return Yellow;
                                   break;
                     case ORANGE: return Orange;
                      >
              >

              main( )
              {   FRUIT snack;
                  snack.variety = APPLE;
                  snack.shape = ROUND;
                  printf ("°/0s\n" ,color (&snack));
              >

  FIG. 12.2 A simple example for scalar replacement of aggregates in C.

              char* Red = "red";
              char* Yellow = "yellow";
              char* Orange = "orange";

              main( )
              { FRUIT snack;
                 VARIETY tl;
                 SHAPE t2;
                 COLOR t3;
                 tl = APPLE;
                 t2 = ROUND;
                 switch (tl) {
                    case APPLE:          t3 = Red;
                                         break;
                          case BANANA:   t3 = Yellow;
                                         break;
                          case ORANGE:   t3 = Orange;
                  >
                  printf ("°/0s\n" ,t3);
              >

  FIG. 12,3 Main procedure resulting from procedure integration and scalar replacement of
            aggregates for the program in Figure 12.2.
            Section 12.3           Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation                  333


            main( )
            {   printf ("°/0s\n" ,"red");
            >
 FIG. 12.4 Main procedure after constant propagation and dead-code elimination for the program
            in Figure 12.3.

12.3        Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation
            Algebraic simplifications use algebraic properties of operators or particular operator-
            operand combinations to simplify expressions. Reassociation refers to using specific
            algebraic properties—namely, associativity, commutativity, and distributivity—to
            divide an expression into parts that are constant, loop-invariant (i.e., have the same
            value for each iteration of a loop), and variable. We present most of our examples
            in source code rather than in m ir , simply because they are easier to understand as
            source code and because the translation to mir is generally trivial.
                 Like constant folding, algebraic simplifications and reassociation are best struc­
            tured in a compiler as a subroutine that can be called from any other phase that can
            make use of it (see Figure 12.37).
                The most obvious algebraic simplifications involve combining a binary operator
            with an operand that is the algebraic identity element for the operator or with an
            operand that always yields a constant, independent of the value of the other operand.
            For example, for any integer-valued constant or variable /, the following are always
            true:
                i + 0 = 0 + i = i~ 0 = i
                0 - i = -i
                i * l — l * i —i / 1 = i
                /' *   0   =   0   *   /   =   0

            There are also simplifications that apply to unary operators, or to combinations of
            unary and binary operators, such as
                - (- /) = i
                1   + (-/) = / - /
                Similar simplifications apply to Boolean and bit-field types. For fr, a Boolean­
            valued constant or variable, we have
                b V tru e = tru e V b = tru e
                b V fa lse = fa lse V b = b
            and corresponding rules for &. For bit-field values, rules similar to those for Booleans
            apply, and others apply for shifts as well. Suppose f has a bit-field value whose
            length is < tv, the word length of the machine. Then, for example, the following
            simplifications apply to logical shifts:
                f s h l 0 = fs h x 0 = fshra 0 = f
                f s h l w = f s h r w = /shra w = 0
                Algebraic simplifications may also apply to relational operators, depending on
            the architecture being compiled for. For example, on a machine with condition
334   Early Optimizations


      codes, testing i < j when i —j has just been computed can be done by branching,
      based on whether the “ negative” condition-code bit was set by the subtraction, if
      the subtraction sets the condition codes. Note that the subtraction may cause an
      overflow also, while the less-than relation will not, but this can usually simply be
      ignored.
          Some simplifications can be viewed as strength reductions, i.e., replacing an
      operator by one that is faster to compute, such as

          1t 2 = i * i
          2 */ = / + /

      (where i is again integer-valued). Multiplications by small constants can frequently
      be done faster by sequences of shifts and adds (and, for pa-r isc , instructions that
      combine a shift and an add) than by using multiply instructions. If overflow detection
      is not an issue, subtractions may also be used. Thus, for example, i * 5 can be
      computed by

          t <- i sh l 2
          t <r- t + i

      and i * 7 by

          t <r- i sh l 3
          t <- t - i

      This technique is usually more effective if it is applied during code generation than
      optimization.
           Another class of simplifications involves the use of commutativity and associa­
      tivity. For example, for integer variables i and j ,

          (i - j) + (i - j) + (i - j) + (i - j) = 4 * i - 4 * j

      except that we may incur spurious overflows in the simplified form. For example,
      on a 32-bit system, if i = 230 = 0x40000000 and j = 230 - 1 = 0 x 3 f f f f f f f , then
      the expression on the left evaluates to 4 without incurring any overflows, while that
      on the right also evaluates to 4, but incurs two overflows, one for each multipli­
      cation. Whether the overflows matter or not depends on the source language—in
      C or Fortran 77 they don’t, while in Ada they do. It is essential that the opti­
      mizer implementer be aware of such issues. While Fortran 77 ignores the overflows
      here, Section 6.6.3 of its definition states that the order of evaluation of expres­
      sions involving parentheses must respect the parentheses, so this is still not a valid
      transformation for it.
           We give an algorithm for algebraic simplification in the following subsection,
      which discusses algebraic simplification of addressing expressions and that applies
      equally well to integers and Booleans. Algebraic simplifications generally do not have
      a large payoff in performance improvement by themselves, but they often make other
      optimizations possible. For example, given the statement

          i = i + j * 1
         Section 12.3       Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation                     335


         embedded in a Fortran 77 loop, i might not be recognizable as an induction variable
         (Section 14.1), despite j ’s being known to be constant within the containing loop,
         but the result of simplifying it,

                i = i + j

         certainly would result in i ’s being so recognized. Also, other optimizations provide
         opportunities for algebraic simplifications. For example, constant folding and con­
         stant propagation would turn

                j = o
                k = 1 * j
                i = i + k * 1

         into

                j = o
                k = 0
                i = i

         allowing the assignment to i to be eliminated entirely.
              Recognizing applicable algebraic simplifications is itself simplified by canonical-
         ization, a transformation discussed in the next section that uses commutativity to
         order the operands of an expression so that, for example, an expression whose oper­
         ands are a variable and a constant always has the constant as its first operand. This
         nearly halves the number of cases that need to be checked.


12.3.1   Algebraic Simplification and Reassociation of Addressing
         Expressions
         Algebraic simplification and reassociation o f addressing expressions is a special
         case in that overflow makes no difference in address computations, so the trans­
         formations can be performed with impunity. It may enable constant-valued ex­
         pressions that occur in addressing computations to be evaluated at compile time,
         loop-invariant expressions (see Section 13.2) to be enlarged and simplified, and
         strength reduction (see Section 14.1.2) to be applied to larger components of address
         computations.
               Since overflow never makes a difference in addressing arithmetic, all the integer
         simplifications we have discussed above can be used with impunity in computing ad­
         dresses. Many of them, however, rarely apply. The most important ones by far for
         addressing are the ones that make up reassociation, namely, associativity, commuta­
         tivity, and distributivity.
               The general strategy of simplifying addressing expressions is canonicalization,
         i.e., turning them into sums of products and then applying commutativity to collect
         the constant-valued and loop-invariant parts together. As an example, consider the
         Pascal fragment in Figure 12.5. The address of a [ i , j ] is

                base_a + ( ( i - l o l ) * (h i2 - lo2 + 1) + j - lo 2 ) * w
336           Early Optimizations


              var a: array[lol..hil,lo2..hi2] of eltype;
                 i, j: integer;

              do j = lo2 to hi2 begin
                 a[i, j] := b + a[i,j]
              end

  FIG. 12.5 A Pascal fragment that accesses elements of an array.

              where b a s e .a is the address of the base of the array and w is the size in bytes
              of objects of type elty p e . This requires two multiplications, three additions, and
              three subtractions, as is—an absurdly large amount of computation for sequentially
              accessing elements of an array inside a loop. The value of w is always known at
              compile time. Similarly, l o l , h i l , lo2, and hi2 are also known at compile time; we
              assume that they are. Reassociating the addressing expression to cluster the constant
              parts at the left end, we have
                  - ( l o l * (hi2 - lo2 + 1) - lo2 ) * w + base_a
                          + (hi2 - lo2 + l ) * i * w + j * w
              and all of
                  - ( l o l * (hi2 - lo2 + 1) - lo 2 ) * w
              can be computed at compile time, while most of the rest, namely,
                  base_a + (hi2 - lo2 + 1) * i * w
              is loop-invariant, and so can be computed once before entering the loop, leaving
              only the j * w part to be computed and added during each iteration. In turn, this
              multiplication can be strength-reduced to an addition. So we have reduced the
              original two multiplications, three additions, and three subtractions to a single
              addition in the common case—and in our example loop in Figure 12.5 we have
              actually reduced it further, since we compute the same address for both occurrences
              of a [ i , j ] and hence only need to do the addition once, rather than twice.
                   Simplifying addressing expressions is relatively easy, although it depends some­
              what on the intermediate-code structure we have chosen. In general, it should be
              thought of as (or actually done by) collecting the intermediate-code instructions that
              make up an addressing computation into an expression tree whose root represents
              the resulting address. Associativity, commutativity, distributivity, algebraic identi­
              ties, and constant folding are then applied recursively to the tree to put it in the
              canonical form of a sum of products (where one or both of the terms that make up
              a product may be a sum of constant-valued components); commutativity is used to
              collect the constant-valued components (usually as the left child of the root); and the
              tree is then broken up into individual instructions (assuming that trees are not the
              intermediate-code form being used).
                   Alternatively, the computations represented by a series of m i r or l i r instructions
              can be combined into a single expression (which is not legal intermediate code), the
              transformations applied to it, and the resulting expression transformed back into a
              series of legal intermediate-code instructions.
            Section 12.3             Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation                                       337

                      +                                                       +                      +
            R1                          cl+c2                       R2
                 cl        c2                                            t         c        c                t


                       *                                                       *                     *




                                                                                                     +
            R5                          cl-c2
                 cl        c2                                                               -c               t


                      +                             +                         *                              *


                 tl        +     -- ►           +        t3              tl        *    -- ►             *        t3


                      t2        t3        tl        t2                        t2       t3       tl           t2




            R9                                                      RIO
                                c2                                                     c2
                                               cl+c2                                                 cl*c2
                 cl        t                                             cl        t
FIG, 12,6 Tree transformations to do simplification of addressing expressions, (continued)


                   Care should be taken in identifying constant-valued components to take into
            account those that are constant-valued within the current context, such as a loop,
            but that may not be constant-valued in larger program fragments.
                   To accomplish simplification of addressing expressions in m i r , we translate the
            m i r expressions to trees, recursively apply the tree transformation rules shown in

            Figure 12.6 in the order given, and then translate back to m i r . In the rules, c, c l,
            and c2 represent constants and t , t l , t2 , and t3 represent arbitrary intermediate-
            code trees.
                   Figure 12.7 shows the original tree for the address of the Pascal expression
            a [ i , j ] discussed above and the first stages of applying simplification of addressing
            expressions to it. Figures 12.8 and 12.9 show the remaining stages of its simplifica­
            tion. Note that the last step applies if and only if i is a loop constant in the context
            of the addressing computation and that the computation of C7 would occur before
338          Early Optimizations

                      *                +                       *                   +




  FIG, 12.6 (continued)


             entry to the containing loop, not at compile time. The symbols Cl through C7 repre­
             sent constant values as follows:
                 Cl = hi2 - lo2 + 1
                 C2 = -lol * Cl
                 C3 = C2 - lo2
             Section 12.3     Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation                             339




                                                                i       Cl

FIG. 12.7 Tree for the address of the Pascal expression a [ i , j ] and the first stages of simplifying it.


                 C4 = C3 * w
                 C5 = Cl * w
                 C6 = base.a + C4
                 C7 = C6 + C5 * i

                 Determining which com ponents are constant-valued may either be trivial, be­
             cause they are explicitly constant in the source program or are required to be con­
             stant by the semantics o f the language, or may benefit from data-flow analysis. The
340            Early Optimizations

                               +                                              +


                    b ase_ a       *                               b ase_ a       +




                i          Cl                                Cl          i

  FIG. 12.8 Further stages of simplifying the address of a [ i , j ] .


               latter case is exemplified by changing the above Pascal fragment to the one shown in
               Figure 12.10. Constant propagation (see Section 12.6) will tell us that i is constant
               inside the loop, rather than just loop-invariant, allowing further simplification to
               be performed at compile time. Strength reduction (see Section 14.1.2) of addressing
               expressions also commonly exposes opportunities for reassociation.
                    Other opportunities for algebraic simplification arise in addressing expressions.
               For example, in C, if p is a pointer, it is always true that

                       *(&p) = p

               and, if q is a pointer to a structure with a field s, that

                        (&q)->s = q .s
              Section 12.3                   Algebraic Simplifications and Reassociation                        341




                       +                            *                 R7             b ase_a   +   j   w   R7




                            +                           *       j          w



              b ase_a             C4           C5           i




                     C5                i

 FIG. 12.9 Final stages of simplifying the address of a [ i , j ].


              var a:            a r r a y [ lo l. . h i1 ,lo 2 ..h i2 ]    o f e lt y p e ;
                    i,      j:     in t e g e r ;


              i   :=       10 ;


              do j         = l o 2 t o h i 2 b e g in
                    a [ i, j]        := b + a [ i , j ]
              end

FIG. 12.10 Another Pascal fragment that accesses elements of an array.
342      Early Optimizations


12.3.2   Application o f Algebraic Simplification to Floating-Point
         Expressions
         The attentive reader will have noticed that we have not mentioned floating-point
         computations at all yet in this section. This is because algebraic simplifications rarely
         can be applied safely to them. For example, the a n s i / i e e e floating-point standard
         includes zeroes with both positive and negative signs, i.e., +0.0 and -0.0, and
         x /+ 0 .0 = +«> while x /- 0 .0 = - » for any positive finite positive value x. Also x+0.0
         and x are not necessarily equal, since, if x is a signaling NtfN, the first of them causes
         an exception when the arithmetic operation is executed while the second generally
         would not.
               Let MF denote the maximal finite floating-point value representable in a given
         precision. Then

             1.0 + (MF —MF) = 1.0

         while

             (1.0 + M F ) - M F = 0.0

            Another example of the care with which floating-point computations must be
         handled is the code

             eps := 1.0
             while eps+1.0 > 1.0 do
                oldeps := eps
                eps := 0.5 * eps
             od

         As written, this code fragment computes in oldeps the smallest number x such that
         1 + x > 1. If it is “ optimized” by replacing the test “ ep s+ 1 .0 > 1 .0 ” with “ eps >
         0 .0 ” , it instead computes the maximal x such that x /2 rounds to 0. For example,
         as written, the routine computes oldeps = 2.220446E-16 in double precision, while
         the “ optimized” version computes oldeps = 4.940656E-324. The loop transforma­
         tions discussed in Section 20.4.2 can seriously compound this problem.
              The only algebraic simplifications that Farnum [Farn88] considers appropriate
         for a n s i / i e e e floating point are removal of unnecessary type coercions and replace­
         ment of divisions by constants with equivalent multiplications. An example of an
         unnecessary coercion is

             real s
             double t

             t := (double)s * (double)s

         when performed on a machine that has a single-precision multiply that produces a
         double-precision result.
             Section 12.4         Value Numbering                                                343

                 To replace division by a constant with a multiplication, it must be the case that
             the constant and its reciprocal are both represented exactly. Use of the a n s i /i e e e
             inexact flag allows this to be easily determined.


12.4        Value Numbering
             Value numbering is one of several methods for determining that two computations
             are equivalent and eliminating one of them. It associates a symbolic value with each
             computation without interpreting the operation performed by the computation, but
             in such a way that any two computations with the same symbolic value always
             compute the same value.
                  Three other optimizations have some similar effects, namely, sparse condi­
             tional constant propagation (Section 12.6), common-subexpression elimination
             (Section 13.1), and partial-redundancy elimination (Section 13.3). However, value
             numbering is, in fact, incomparable with the three others. The examples in Fig­
             ure 12.11 show situations that distinguish value numbering from each of the others.
             In Figure 12.11(a), value numbering determines that j and 1 are assigned the
             same values, while constant propagation does not, since their values depend on
             the value input for i, and neither common-subexpression elimination nor partial-
             redundancy elimination does, since there are no common subexpressions in the
             code. In Figure 12.11(b), constant propagation determines that j and k are as­
             signed the same values, since it interprets the arithmetic operations, while value
             numbering does not. In Figure 12.11(c), both global common-subexpression elim­
             ination and partial-redundancy elimination determine that the third computation
             of 2 * i is redundant, but value numbering does not, since l ’s value is not always
             equal to j ’s value or always equal to k’s value. Thus, we have shown that there are
             cases where value numbering is more powerful than any of the three others and
             cases where each of them is more powerful than value numbering. As we shall see
             in Section 13.3, partial-redundancy elimination subsumes common-subexpression
             elimination.
                  The original formulation of value numbering operated on individual basic
             blocks. It has since been extended to work on extended basic blocks and, more


             r e a d ( i)             i   <- 2                  r e a d ( i)
             j    i         + 1       j    i     * 2            1 <-        2 *i
             k <- i                   k <- i     + 2            if   i    > 0 g o to L I
             1 <- k + 1                                         j <"     2 *i
                                                                g o to L 2
                                                          L I: k < - 2 * i
                                                          L2:
             (a)                       (b)                (c)
 FIG. 12.11 mir examples that show that value numbering, constant propagation, and common-
            subexpression elimination are incomparable.
344           E arly O p tim ization s


              a <- i + 1                        a <- i + 1
              b    1 + i                        b <— a
              i   *-   i                        i    j
              if i + 1 goto LI                  tl    i + 1
                                                if tl goto LI
              c <- i + 1                        c    11
              (a)                               (b)
 FIG. 12.12   Value numbering in a basic block. The sequence of instructions in (a) is replaced by the
              one in (b). Note the recognition of the expressions in the first and second instructions
              as being identical modulo commutativity and the conversion of the b in if in the fourth
              instruction to an assignment and a v a l i f .



              recently, to a global form that operates on entire procedures (see Section 12.4.2).
              The global form requires that the procedure be in SSA form. We first discuss value
              numbering as applied to basic blocks and then the SSA-based form that applies to
              whole procedures.


12.4.1        Value Numbering as Applied to Basic Blocks
              To do value numbering in a basic block, we use hashing to partition the expressions
              that are com puted into classes. Upon encountering an expression, we compute its
              hash value. If it is not already in the sequence o f expressions with that hash value,
              we add it to the sequence. If the expression com putation occurs in an instruction that
              is not an assignment (e.g., an if instruction), we split it into two instructions, the first
              o f which com putes the expression and stores its value in a new temporary and the
              second of which uses the tem porary in place o f the expression (see Figure 12.12 for
              an exam ple). If it is already in the sequence, we replace the current computation by a
              use o f the left-hand variable in the instruction represented in the sequence. The hash
              function and expression-m atching function are defined to take commutativity of the
              operator into account (see Figure 12.12).
                   Code to implement the above process is given in Figure 12.13. The data structure
              H ashSeq [1 • • m] is an array such that H ashSeq [/] is a sequence o f indexes of instruc­
              tions whose expressions hash to i and whose values are available. The routines used
              in the code are as follows:

         1.   H ash (o/?r,op<il,op<i2) returns the hash value for the expression formed by its
              arguments (if the operator opr is unary, o p d l is n i l ) ; if the operator is commutative,
              it returns the sam e value for both orders o f the operands.

         2.   M atch_Exp(m s£l,m s£2) returns t r u e if the expressions in in st\ and in stl are iden­
              tical up to commutativity.
         3.   R e m o v e (f,r a ,i/,£ ,n b lo c k s ,B lo c k ) removes from / * [ l * * m ] all instruction indexes
              i such that B lo c k [fe] [/] uses variable v as an operand (see Figure 12.14 for the
              definition o f Remove ( )).
            Section 12.4       Value N um bering                                                                345


            Hash: (Operator x Operand x Operand) — > integer

            procedure Value.Number(m,nblocks,ninsts,Block,maxhash)
               m, nblocks: in integer
               ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
               Block: inout array [1••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
               maxhash: in integer
            begin
                i : integer
                HashSeq: array [1 “ maxhash] of sequence of integer
                for i := 1 to maxhash do
                    HashSeq [i] := []
                od
                i := 1
                while i ^ ninsts [m] do
                    case Exp.Kind(Block[m][i].kind) of
            binexp: i += Process_Inst(m,i,nblocks,Block,
                          Block[m][i].opdl,Block[m][i].opd2,maxhash,HashSeq)
            unexp:     i += Process.Inst(m,i,nblocks,Block,Block[m][i].opd,
                          nil,maxhash,HashSeq)
            default: i += 1
                    esac
                od
            end      || Value_Number

            procedure Process_Inst(m,i,nblocks,nblocks,Block,opndl,opnd2,
               maxhash,HashSeq) returns integer
               m, i, nblocks, maxhash: in integer
               Block: inout array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
               opndl, opnd2: in Operand
               HashSeq: inout array [1 “ maxhash] of sequence of integer
            begin
               hval, j, retval := 1: integer
               inst := Block[m][i], inst2: MIRInst
               doit :- true: boolean
               tj: Var
                hval := Hash (in st .opr, opndl ,opnd2)                                                (continued)

FIG. 12.13 Code to perform value numbering in a basic block.



                 A s an exam p le o f V alue_N um ber( ) , co n sid er the m ir co d e in Figure 1 2 .1 5 (a ).
            Su p p ose m axhash = 3. Then w e initialize H ash S eq [1 • *3 ] to em pty sequ en ces, an d
            set i = 1. B lo c k [m] [1] h as a b in e x p a s its right-hand side, so h v a l is set to its
            hash value, say, 2, an d d o i t = t r u e . H a sh S e q [2] = [ ] , so w e p roceed to call
            Remove (H a sh S e q ,m a x h a sh , a ,m ,n ,B l o c k ) , w hich do es nothing, since the hash se­
            quences are all em pty. N e x t, since d o i t = t r u e an d H a s _ L e ft ( b i n a s g n ) = t r u e ,
            w e a d d the in struction ’s in d ex to the a p p ro p ria te h ash sequen ce, nam ely,
            H ash Seq [2] = [ 1 ], P r o c e s _ I n s t ( ) returns 1, so i is set to 2.
346             Early Optimizations

                    for j := 1 to |HashSeq[hval]I do
                       inst2 := Block[m][HashSeq[hval]Ij]
                       if Match_Exp(inst,inst2) then
                           II if expressions have the same hash value and they match,
                           II replace later computation by result of earlier one
                          doit     false
                          if Has_Left(inst.kind) then
                              Block[m][i] := <kind:valasgn,left:inst.left,
                                 opd:<kind:var,val:inst2.left >>
                          elif inst.kind e {binif,unif} then
                              Block [m][i] := <kind:valif,opd:<kind:var,
                                 val:inst2.left>,lbl:inst.lbl>
                          elif inst.kind e {bintrap,untrap} then
                              Block[m] [i] := <kind:valtrap,opd:<kind:var,
                                 val:inst2.left >,trapno:inst.trapno)
                          fi
                       fi
                    od
                    || if instruction is an assignment, remove all expressions
                    I| that use its left-hand side variable
                    if Has_Left(inst.kind) then
                       Remove(HashSeq,maxhash,inst.left,m ,nblocks,Block)
                    fi
                    if doit then
                       I| if needed, insert instruction that uses result of computation
                       if !Has.Left(inst.kind) then
                          tj := new_tmp( )
                          if Block[m][i].kind e {binif,unif} then
                              insert.after(m,i,ninsts,Block,<kind:valif,
                                 opd:<kind:var,val:tj >,label:Block[m][i].label)
                              retval := 2
                          elif Block[m][i].kind e {bintrap,untrap} then
                              insert_after(m,i,ninsts,Block,
                                 <kind:valtrap,opd:<kind:var,val:tj >,
                                 trapno:Block[m][i].trapno)
                              retval := 2
                          fi
                          II and replace instruction by one that computes
                          II value for inserted instruction
                          if opnd2 = nil then
                              Block[m] [i] := <kind:unasgn,left:tj,
                                 opr:inst.opr,opd:opndl>
                          else
                              Block[m] [i] := <kind:binasgn,left:tj,
                                 opr:inst.opr,opdl:opndl,opd2:opnd2>
                          fi
                       fi
                       HashSeq[hval] ®= [i]
                    fi
                    return retval
                end     II Process.Inst

 F IG . 12.13   (continued)
             Section 12.4      Value Numbering                                                             347


             procedure Remove(f,m ,v ,k ,nblocks,Block)
                 f: inout array [l**m] of sequence of integer
                m, k, nblocks: in integer
                v : in Var
                Block: in array [1••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
             begin
                 i, j : integer
                 for i := 1 to m do
                    for j := 1 to If [i] I do
                        case Exp_Kind(Block[k][f[i]Ij].kind) of
             binexp:       if Block[k][f[i]Ij].opdl.val = v
                              V Block[k][f[i]lj].opd2.val = v then
                              f[i] ©= j
                           fi
             unexp:        if Block[k][f[i]Ij].opd.val = v then
                              f[i] ©= j
                           fi
             default: esac
                    od
                 od
             end     II Remove

FIG. 12.14   Code to remove killed expressions from the hash function’s bucket sequence.


             1     a <- x V y                 a <- x V y                        a <- x V y
             2     b <- x V y                 b <- a                            b <- a
             3     if !z goto LI              tl     !z                         tl <- !z
             4     x <- !z                    if tl goto LI                     if tl goto LI
             5     c <- x & y                 x <- !z                           x <- tl
             6     if x & y trap 30           c <- x & y                        c <- x & y
             7                                if x & y trap 30                  if c trap 30
             (a)                              (b)                               (c)
FIG. 12.15   (a) An example basic block, (b) the result of applying value numbering to its first three
             instructions, and (c) the result of applying value numbering to the whole block. Note
             that the i f in line 3 has been replaced by two instructions, the first to evaluate the
             condition and the second to perform the conditional branch.


                    B lo c k [m] [2] has a b in e x p as its right-hand side, so h v a l is set to its hash
             value 2 and d o i t = t r u e . H ash S eq [2 ] = [ 1 ], so we call M atch_Exp( ) to com pare
             the expressions in the first and second instructions, which returns t r u e , so we set
             d o i t = f a l s e , evaluate H a s .L e f t ( b i n a s g n ) , and proceed to replace the second
             instruction with b           a. N e x t we call Remove ( ) to delete all instructions that
             use b as an operand from all the hash chains. Since d o i t = t r u e and instruc­
             tion 2 has a left-hand side, we insert its index into its hash sequence, namely,
             H ash Seq[2 ] = [ 1 ,2 ] . N ext, since d o i t = f a l s e , i is set to 3, and we proceed to
             the third instruction.
                 Block [m] [3] has a unexp as its right-hand side, so hval is set to its hash value,
             say, 1, and d o it = tru e. HashSeqtl] = [] and H as_ L eft(u n if) = f a ls e . Since
348      Early O ptim izations


         d o it = tr u e and instruction 3 doesn’t have a left-hand side, we obtain a new tem­
         porary symbol t l , insert the instruction i f t l goto LI after instruction 3, causing
         the following instructions to be renumbered, replace instruction 3 by t l               !z, and
         insert 3 into its hash sequence, namely, H ash Seqfl] = [3 ]. P ro c e s_ In st ( ) returns
         2, so i is set to 5, and we proceed to the next instruction. The resulting basic block
         is shown in Figure 12.15(b).
               Block [m] [5] has a unexp as its right-hand side, so h v al is set to its hash
         value 1 and d o it = tru e . H ash Seq[l] = [3 ], so we call Match_Exp( ) to com­
         pare the expressions in the third and fifth instructions, and it returns tru e . Since
         H as_L eft (unasgn) = tr u e , we call Remove ( ) to delete all instructions that use x as
         an operand from all the hash chains, which results in setting HashSeq[2] = []. Since
         d o it = tru e and instruction 5 has a left-hand side, we insert its index into its hash
         sequence, namely, H ash Seq[l] = [ 3 ,5 ]. P r o c e s_ I n s t( ) returns 1, so i is set to 6,
         and we proceed to the next instruction.
               B lock [m] [6] has a binexp as its right-hand side, so h v al is set to its hash
         value, say, 3, and d o it = tru e . H ashSeq[3] = [], so we skip the loop that checks
         for matching expressions. Since H as_L eft (b in asgn ) = tru e , we call Remove ( ) to
         delete all instructions that use c as an operand from all the hash chains. Since
         d o it = tr u e and instruction 6 has a left-hand side, we insert its index into its hash
         sequence, namely, H ashSeq[3] = [6 ]. P r o c e s_ I n s t( ) returns 1, so i is set to 7,
         and we proceed to the last instruction.
               Block [m] [7] contains a binexp, so h v al is set to its hash value, namely, 3,
         and d o it = tru e . H ashSeq[3] = [6 ], so we call Match_Exp( ) to compare the ex­
         pressions in the sixth and seventh instructions, which returns tru e . Also, we set
         d o it = f a l s e . Since H as_L eft ( b i n i f ) = f a l s e , we replace Block[m] [7] with
         “ i f c t r a p 30” . Since d o it = f a l s e and there are no more instructions, the process
         terminates. The resulting basic block is shown in Figure 12.15(c).
               Note that there is a strong resemblance between value numbering and construct­
         ing the DAG representation of a basic block as discussed in Section 4.9.3. Reusing
         nodes in the DAG as operands, rather than inserting new nodes with the same val­
         ues, corresponds to deleting later computations of equivalent values and replacing
         them by uses of the previously computed ones. In fact, value numbering is frequently
         used in constructing DAGs.


12.4.2   Global Value Numbering
         The earliest approach to global value numbering was developed by Reif and Lewis
         [ReiL77]. A newer, easier to understand, and (computationally) less complex ap­
         proach was developed by Alpern, Wegman, and Zadeck [AlpW88]. We base our
         presentation on the latter.
              We begin by discussing the notion of congruence of variables. The idea is to
         make two variables congruent to each other if the computations that define them
         have identical operators (or constant values) and their corresponding operands are
         congruent (this is, of course, what value numbering does). By this definition, the
         left-hand variables of c    a + 1 and d   b + 1 are congruent as long as a and b are
         congruent. However, as we shall see, this notion is insufficiently precise. To make it
             Section 12.4    Value Numbering                                                    349

             precise, we need to convert the procedure we are to perform global value numbering
             on to SSA form and then to define what is called the value graph of the resulting
             flowgraph.
                  To translate a flowgraph into SSA form, we use the method of iterated domi­
             nance frontiers presented in Section 8.11, which results in a minimal SSA represen­
             tation of the procedure.
                  The value graph of a procedure is a labeled directed graph whose nodes are
             labeled with operators, function symbols, or constants and whose edges represent
             generating assignments and point from an operator or function to its operands;
             the edges are labeled with natural numbers that indicate the operand position that
             each operand has with respect to the given operator or function. We also name the
             nodes, for convenience, with SSA-form variables that indicate where the result of
             the operation represented by a node is stored; or if a node is not named with an
             SSA-form variable, we attach an arbitrary name to it.
                  For example, given the code fragment in Figure 12.16, the corresponding value
             graph (in which we need no subscripts on the variables since each has only one
             definition point) is given in Figure 12.17. Note that c and d are congruent by the
             above definition.
                  Next, consider the example flowgraph in Figure 12.18. Its translation to minimal
             SSA form is shown in Figure 12.19. The value graph for this procedure includes
             cycles, since, for example, ± 2 depends on i 3 and vice versa. The resulting value graph
             is shown in Figure 12.20. The node named n is not filled in because we have no
             information about its value.


             a <— 3
             b <— 3
             c <- a + 1
             d <- b + 1
             if c >= 3 then ...

FIG. 12.16 A short example program fragment for which to construct the value graph.



              a                                                     b




FIG. 12.17 Value graph for the code in Figure 12.16,
350           E a r ly O p t i m i z a t i o n s




 FIG. 12.18   Example flowgraph for global value numbering.




 FIG. 12.19   Minimal SSA form for the flowgraph in Figure 12.18.
              Section 12.4    Value Numbering                                                   351




FIG. 12.20 Value graph for the code in Figure 12.19.




                   Now congruence is defined as the maximal relation on the value graph such
              that two nodes are congruent if either (1) they are the same node, (2) their labels are
              constants and their contents are equal, or (3) they have the same operators and their
              operands are congruent. Two variables are equivalent at a point p in a program if
              they are congruent and their defining assignments dominate p.
                   We compute congruence as the maximal fixed point of a partitioning process
              performed on the value graph. Initially, we assume that all nodes with the same label
              are congruent, and then we repeatedly partition the congruence classes according to
              whether the operands of the members of a partition are congruent, until we obtain
              a fixed point, which must be the maximal one by the character of the partitioning
              process. The partitioning algorithm Global_Value_Number (N ,NLabel,ELabel,B) is
              given in Figure 12.21. It uses four data structures, as follows:


         1.   N is the set of nodes in the value graph.
        2.    NLabel is a function that maps nodes to node labels.
        3.    ELabel is the set of labeled edges from nodes to nodes, where (x, /, y) represents an
              edge from node x to node y labeled /.
        4.    B is an array that is set by the algorithm to the resulting partition.


                  The algorithm, based on one developed by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman
              [AhoH74], uses a worklist to contain the set of partitions that need to be examined
              and three functions, as follows:
352           Early Optim izations


              NodeLabel = Operator u Function u Var u Const

              procedure Global_Value_Number(N,NLabel,ELabel,B) returns integer
                 N: in set of Node
                 NLabel: in Node — > NodeLabel
                 ELabel: in set of (Node x integer x Node)
                 B : inout array [••] of set of Node
              begin
                 i, jl, kl, m, x, z: Node
                 j, k, p: integer
                 S, Worklist: set of Node
                 I| initialize partitions in B[n] and map nodes to partitions
                 p := Initialize(N,NLabel,B,Worklist)
                 while Worklist * 0 do
                     i := ♦Worklist
                     Worklist -= {i>
                     m    ♦B[i]
                     I| attempt to subdivide each nontrivial partition
                     I| until the worklist is empty
                     for j := 1 to Arity(NLabel,i) do
                        jl := Follow_Edge(ELabel,m,j)
                        S := B[i] - -Cm}
                        while S * 0 do
                           x := ♦S
                           S -= {x>
                           if Follow_Edge(ELabel,x,j) * jl then
                              p += 1
                              B[p] := {m}
                              B[i] -= {m}
                              while S * 0 do
                                 z := ♦S
                                 S -= {z}
                                 for k := 1 to Arity(NLabel,i) do
                                     kl := Follow_Edge(ELabel,m,k)
                                     if kl * Follow.Edge(ELabel,z,k) then
                                        B [p] u= {z}
                                        B [i] -= {z}
                                     fi
                                 od
                              od
                              if |B[i] | > 1 then
                                 Worklist u= {i}
                              fi

 FIG. 12.21   Partitioning algorithm to do global value numbering by computing congruence.
             Section 12.4           Value Numbering                                                 353


                                    if IB [p]| > 1 then
                                       Worklist u= {p}
                                    fi
                               fi
                          od
                   od
                od
                return p
             end    || Global.Value.Number

FIG. 12.21 (continued)

        1.   I n i t i a l i z e (N,NLabel,B, Worklist) initializes B [ l] through some B [p] with the
             initial partitioning of the nodes of the value graph (i.e., all nodes with the same label
             go into the same partition) and Worklist with the initial worklist, and returns p as
             its value.
        2.   A rity (NLabel,j) returns the number of operands of the operators in B [/].
        3.   Follow _Edge(ELabel,x,j) returns the node y such that there is a labeled edge
             (x, /, y) e ELabel.
             Code for the first and third of these functions is provided in Figure 12.22. Computing
             A rity ( ) is trivial. The worst-case running time for the partitioning algorithm is
             0 (e • log e), where e is the number of edges in the value graph.
                  For our example flowgraph in Figure 12.19, the initial number of partitions p is
             11, and the initial partitioning is as follows:
                 B [1]         = "tcijdijiiJj}
                 B[2]          = {C2,d2>
                 B[3]          = { c 0>
                 B[4]          = { c 3>
                 B[5]          = {nj>
                 B [6]         = {d3>
                 B [7]         = { i 3 , j 3>
                 B[8]
                 B[9]          = -Ci2,j2>
                 B[10]         = {C4>
                 B [ll]        = { t l>
             The initial value of W orklist is { 7 ,8 ,9 } . The result of the partitioning process is 12
             partitions, as follows:
                 B [1]         = {ci,di,ij,j j}
                 B [2]         = <C2,d2>
                 B [3]         = {C0>
                 B [4]         = {C3>
                 B [5]         = {nj>
                 B [6]         = {d3>
                 B[7]          = ■Ci3,j3>
354           Early O ptim izations


              procedure Initialize(N,NLabel,B,Worklist) returns integer
                  N: in set of Node
                  NLabel: in Node — > NodeLabel
                  B : out array [••] of set of Node
                  Worklist: out set of Node
              begin
                  i, k := 0: integer
                  v: Node
                  I| assemble partitions, node-to-partition map, and initial worklist
                  Worklist := 0
                  for each v e N do
                       i := 1
                       while i ^ k do
                           if NLabel (v) = NLabel O B [i] ) then
                               B[i] u= {v}
                               if Arity(NLabel,v) > 0 & |B[i]I > 1 then
                                    Worklist u= {i}
                               fi
                               i := k + 1
                           fi
                           i += 1
                       od
                       if i = k+1 then
                           k += 1
                           B[k] := {v}
                       fi
                  od
                  return k
              end     |I Initialize

              procedure Follow_Edge(ELabel,x,j) returns Node
                  ELabel: in set of (Node x integer x Node)
                  x: in Node
                  j : in integer
              begin
                  el: Node x integer x Node
                  for each el e ELabel do
                       if x = el@l & j = el@2 then
                          return el@3
                      fi
                  od
              end     I| Follow_Edge

 FIG. 12.22 Auxiliary routines used by the partitioning algorithm.
     Section 12.4      Value Numbering                                                        355

           B [8]    = {i4,j4>
           B [9]    = {i2,j2>
           B [10]   ={c4>
           B [11]   ={t!>
           B [12]   = {i5,j5>

     Thus, corresponding i and j nodes in the value graph are congruent and equivalence
     of variables can be determined as a result.
          As a second example, suppose we change the assignment i           i + 3 in block
     B4 to i       i - 3 in Figure 12.18. Then the value graph is identical to the one in
     Figure 12.20, except that the node named i 5 contains a         instead of a “ +” . The
     initial partitioning is the same as shown above for the original program, except that
     p is 12 and B [8 ] through B [11] are replaced by

           B [8]    ={i4,j4,j5>
           B [9]    ={i5>
           B [10]   = { i 2,j2>
           B [11]   ={c4>
           B [12]   ={ti>

     The final partitioning has each of i 2, i 3 , i 4, i 5 , j 2, J 3 , j 4, and j 5 in a separate
     partition.
          Alpern, Wegman, and Zadeck discuss a series of generalizations of this approach
     to global value numbering, including the following:

1.   doing structural analysis of the program to be analyzed (Section 7.7) and using
     special ^-functions designed for the control-flow constructs so as to be able to
     determine congruence with respect to control flow;
2.   application of the method to array operations by modeling, e.g.,

           a[i] <r- 2 * b[i]

     by

           a <r- update (a, i,2*access(b,i))

     and
3.   taking commutativity into account, so as to be able, for example, to recognize a * b
     and b * a as congruent.

     Each of these changes can increase the number of congruences detected.
          Briggs, Cooper, and Simpson extend hash-based value numbering to work on
     a routine’s dominator tree, extend the global approach discussed above to take
     expression availability into account (see Section 13.3), and compare hash-based
     and global approaches to value numbering with the result that the two approaches
     are incomparable—there are cases for which each does better than the other. In a
     later paper, Cooper and Simpson discuss an approach to global value numbering
     that works on strongly connected components of a routine’s SSA representation and
356    Early Optimizations


       that combines the best properties of the hashing and global approaches and is more
       effective than both of them. (See Section 12.8 for citations.)


12.5   Copy Propagation
       Copy propagation is a transformation that, given an assignment x               y for some
       variables x and y, replaces later uses of x with uses of y, as long as intervening
       instructions have not changed the value of either x or y.
            From here on, we generally need to represent the structure of a procedure as
       an array of basic blocks, each of which is an array of instructions. We use the vari­
       able nblocks and the arrays n i n s t s [ l • • nblocks] and B lo c k [1 • •nblocks] [• •] ,
       declared as
            n b lo c k s: in te g e r
            n in s t s : a rray [ 1 • • n blocks] of in te g e r
            Block: a rray [1 • • nblocks] of array [ • • ] of In stru c tio n
       where Block [/] consists of instructions Block [/] [1] through Block [/] [n in sts [/]],
       to do so.
            Before proceeding to discuss copy propagation in detail, we consider its rela­
       tionship to register coalescing, which is discussed in detail in Section 16.3. The two
       transformations are identical in their effect, as long as optimization is done on a low-
       level intermediate code with registers (symbolic1 and/or real) in place of identifiers.
       However, the methods for determining whether register coalescing or copy propaga­
       tion applies to a particular copy assignment are different: we use data-flow analysis
       for copy propagation and the interference graph for register coalescing. Another dif­
       ference is that copy propagation can be performed on intermediate code at any level
       from high to low.
            For example, given the flowgraph in Figure 12.23(a), the instruction b          a in
       block B1 is a copy assignment. Neither a nor b is assigned a value in the flowgraph
       following this instruction, so all the uses of b can be replaced by uses of a, as shown
       in Figure 12.23(b). While this may not appear to be a great improvement in the code,
       it does render b useless—there are no instructions in (b) in which it appears as an
       operand—so dead-code elimination (see Section 18.10) can remove the assignment
       b     a; and the replacement makes it possible to compute the value assigned to e by
       a left shift rather than an addition, assuming that a is integer-valued.
            Copy propagation can reasonably be divided into local and global phases, the
       first operating within individual basic blocks and the latter across the entire flow-
       graph, or it can be accomplished in a single global phase. To achieve a time bound
       that is linear in «, we use a hashed implementation of the table ACP of the available
       copy instructions in the algorithm in Figure 12.24. The algorithm assumes that an
       array of mir instructions Block[m] [1], . . . , Block[m] M is provided as input.


       1. Symbolic registers, as found, for example, in lir , are an extension of a machine’s real register
       set to include as many more as may be needed to generate code for a program. It is the task of
       global register allocation (Chapter 16) to pack the symbolic registers into the real registers, possibly
       generating stores and loads to save and restore their values, respectively, in the process.
             Section 12.5       Copy Propagation                                                357




             (a)                                      (b)
FIG. 12.23   (a) Example of a copy assignment to propagate, namely, b <- a in Bl, and (b) the result
             of doing copy propagation on it.

                   procedure Local_Copy_Prop(m,n ,Block)
                      m, n: in integer
                      Block: inout array [l--n] of array [••] of MIRInst
                   begin
                      ACP := 0: set of (Var x Var)
                      i: integer
                      for i := 1 to n do
                          II replace operands that are copies
                         case Exp.Kind(Block[m][i].kind) of
             binexp:         Block[m][i].opdl.val := Copy.Value(Block[m][i].opdl,ACP)
                              Block[m][i].opd2.val := Copy.Value(Block[m][i].opd2,ACP)
             unexp:           Block[m][i].opd.val := Copy.Value(Block[m][i].opd,ACP)
             listexp:         for j := 1 to IBlock[m][i].argsI do
                                 Block [m][i].argslj@l.val :=
                               Copy.Value(Block[m][i].argslj@l,ACP)
                         od
             default: esac
                      I| delete pairs from ACP that are invalidated by the current
                      I| instruction if it is an assignment
                      if Has.Left(Block[m][i].kind) then
                         Remove.ACP(ACP,Block[m] [i].left)
                      fi
                      I| insert pairs into ACP for copy assignments
                      if Block[m][i].kind = valasgn & Block[m][i].opd.kind = var
                         & Block[m][i].left * Block[m][i].opd.val then
                         ACP u= {<Block[m][i].left,Block[m][i].opd.val»
                      fi

                   end      II Local.Copy.Prop
                                                                                        (continued)

FIG. 12.24   O(n) algorithm for local copy propagation.
358          Early Optimizations


                procedure Remove_ACP(ACP,v)
                   ACP: inout set of (Var x Var)
                   v : in Var
                begin
                   T := ACP: set of (Var x Var)
                   acp: Var x Var
                   for each acp e T do
                       if acp@l = v V acp@2 = v then
                          ACP -= {acp}
                       fi
                   od
                end     || Remove_ACP

                procedure Copy_Value(opnd,ACP) returns Var
                   opnd: in Operand
                   ACP: in set of (Var x Var)
                begin
                   acp: Var x Var
                   for each acp e ACP do
                      if opnd.kind = var & opnd.val = acp@l then
                          return acp@2
                      fi
                   od
                   return opnd.val
                end     II Copy.Value

 FIG. 12.24 (continued)


                  As an example of the use of the resulting 0 (n ) algorithm, consider the code in
             Figure 12.25. The second column shows a basic block of five instructions before
             applying the algorithm, the fourth column shows the result of applying it, and the
             third column shows the value of ACP at each step.
                  To perform global copy propagation, we first do a data-flow analysis to deter­
             mine which copy assignments reach uses of their left-hand variables unimpaired, i.e.,
             without having either variable redefined in between. We define the set COPY(i) to
             consist of the instances of copy assignments occurring in block i that reach the end
             of block /. More explicitly, COPY(i) is a set of quadruples (w, i/, /, pos), such that
             u     v is a copy assignment and pos is the position in block i where the assignment
             occurs, and neither u nor v is assigned to later in block /. We define KILL(i) to be the
             set of copy assignment instances killed by block /, i.e., KILL(i) is the set of quadru­
             ples («, v, blk, pos) such that u <- v is a copy assignment occurring at position pos
             in block blk ^ /. For the example in Figure 12.26, the C O P Y () and K IL L () sets are
             as follows:

                 COPY(entry)       =   0
                 COPY(Bl)          = {(d, c, Bl, 2)}
                 COPY (B2)         = «g,e,B2,2)}
            Section 12.5       Copy Propagation                                                    359

            Position       Code Before    ACP                   Code After

                                          0
             1             b <- a                               b <- a
                                          { < b ,a »
            2              c <- b + 1                           c <- a + 1
                                          { < b ,a »
             3             d <- b                               d <- a
                                          {<b,a>,<d,a>}
            4              b <- d + c                           b <- a + c
                                          { < d ,a »
             5             b <- d                               b <- a
                                          {< d ,a > ,< b ,a »

FIG. 12.25 An example of the linear-time local copy-propagation algorithm.




                 COPY( B3)          = 0
                 COPY (B4)          = 0
                 COPY(B5)           = 0
                 COPY(B6)           = 0
                 COPY(exit)         - 0

                 K ILL(e ntry)      = 0
                 K ILL( Bl)         = {<g>
                 KILL(B2)           = 0
                 K ILL( B3)         - 0
                 KILL( B4)          = 0
                 KILL( B5)          = 0
                 KILL( B6)          = «d,
                 K/LL(ex it)        = 0


                  Next, we define data-flow equations for CPin(i) and CPout(i) that represent the
             sets of copy assignments that are available for copy propagation on entry to and exit
             from block /, respectively. A copy assignment is available on entry to block i if it is
             available on exit from all predecessors of block /, so the path-combining operator
             is intersection. A copy assignment is available on exit from block / if it is either in
             COPY(j) or it is available on entry to block / and not killed by block /, i.e., if it is in
             CPin(j) and not in K ILL(j). Thus, the data-flow equations are
360           Early Optimizations


                                            entry |




 FIG. 12.26 Another example for copy propagation.


                    CPin(i) =               CPoutij)
                                jePred(i)

                  CP out (i) = COPY (/) U (CPin{i) - KILL(i))
              and the proper initialization is CPm(entry) = 0 and CPin(i) = U for all i ^ entry,
              where U is the universal set of quadruples, or at least

                  U = U COPY{i)
                        i

              The data-flow analysis for global copy propagation can be performed efficiently with
              a bit-vector representation of the sets.
                   Given the data-flow information CPin( ) and assuming that we have already
              done local copy propagation, we perform global copy propagation as follows:
         1.   For each basic block 5, set ACP = { a e Var x Var where 3w e in teg er such th at
              <a@l,a@2,P,w> e C Pin(P)}.
         2.   For each basic block £, perform the local copy-propagation algorithm from Fig­
              ure 12.24 on block B (omitting the assignment ACP := 0).
                  For our example in Figure 12.26, the C Pin{) sets are
                  CPin (entry)      = 0
                  CPwf(Bl)          = 0
            Section 12.5   Copy Propagation                                                361




FIG. 12.27 Flowgraph from Figure 12.26 after copy propagation.


                CPin{B2)        = {(d,c, Bl, 2)}
                CPin{B3)        = {(d, c, Bl, 2), (g, e, B2,2)}
                CPm(B4)         = {<d, c, Bl, 2), (g, e, B2,2)}
                CPm(B5)         = {<d, c, Bl, 2), (g, e, B2,2)}
                CPin(ex it)     = {(g,e, B2,2)}
            Doing local copy propagation within Bl and global copy propagation across the
            entire procedure turns the flowgraph in Figure 12.26 into the one in Figure 12.27.
                 The local copy-propagation algorithm can easily be generalized to work on
            extended basic blocks. To do so, we process the basic blocks that make up an
            extended basic block in preorder, i.e., each block before its successors, and we
            initialize the table ACP for each basic block other than the initial one with the
            final value of ACP from its predecessor block. Correspondingly, the global copy-
            propagation algorithm can be generalized to use extended basic blocks as the nodes
            with which data-flow information is associated. To do so, we must associate a
            separate CPout{ ) set with each exit from an extended basic block, since the paths
            through the extended basic block will generally make different copy assignments
            available.
                 If we do local copy propagation followed by global copy propagation (both on
            extended basic blocks) for our example in Figure 12.26, the result is the same, but
            more of the work happens in the local phase. Blocks B2, B3, B4, and B6 make up an
            extended basic block and the local phase propagates the value of e assigned to g in
            block B2 to all of them.
362           Early O ptim izations




 FIG. 12.28 Copy assignments not detected by global copy propagation.


                  Note that the global copy-propagation algorithm does not identify copy assign­
             ments such as the two x <- y statements in blocks B2 and B3 in Figure 12.28. The
             transformation known as tail merging (see Section 18.8) will replace the two copy
             assignments by one, in effect moving the copy into a separate basic block of its
             own. Copy propagation will then recognize it and propagate the copy into block B4.
             However, this presents a phase-ordering problem for some compilers: tail merging is
             generally not done until machine instructions have been generated.
                  Alternatively, either partial-redundancy elimination (Section 13.3) applied to
             assignments or code hoisting (Section 13.5) can be used to move both occurrences of
             the statement x     y to block Bl, and that can be done during the same optimization
             phase as copy propagation.



12.6          Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation
             Constant propagation is a transformation that, given an assignment x <r- c for a vari­
             able x and a constant c, replaces later uses of x with uses of c as long as intervening
             assignments have not changed the value of x. For example, the assignment b          3 in
             block Bl in Figure 12.29(a) assigns the constant value 3 to b and no other assignment
             in the flowgraph assigns to b. Constant propagation turns the flowgraph into the one
             shown in Figure 12.29(b). Note that all occurrences of b have been replaced by 3 but
             neither of the resulting constant-valued expressions has been evaluated. This is done
             by constant-expression evaluation (see Section 12.1).
                  Constant propagation is particularly important for Rise architectures because
             it moves small integer constants to the places where they are used. Since all Rises
             provide instructions that take a small integer constant as an operand (with the
             definition of “ sm all” varying from one architecture to another), knowing that an
             operand is such a constant allows more efficient code to be generated. Also, some
             Rises (e.g., m i p s ) have an addressing mode that uses the sum of a register and a
             small constant but not one that uses the sum of two registers; propagating a small
             Section 12.6     Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation                                  363




FIG. 12.29 (a) Example of a constant assignment to propagate, namely, b <- 3 in Bl, and (b) the
             result of doing constant propagation on it.



             constant value to such an address construction saves both registers and instructions.
             More generally, constant propagation reduces the number of registers needed by
             a procedure and increases the effectiveness of several other optimizations, such
             as constant-expression evaluation, induction-variable optimizations (Section 14.1),
             and the dependence-analysis-based transformations discussed in Section 20.4.2.
                 Wegman and Zadeck describe two approaches to constant propagation that take
             conditionals into account, one that uses SSA form and one that doesn’t [WegZ91].
             We describe the SSA-form one here because it is the more efficient of the two. This
             approach to constant propagation has two major advantages over the classic one:
             deriving information from conditionals and being more efficient.
                 To perform sparse conditional constant propagation, we must first transform
             the flowgraph to SSA form, with the additional proviso that each node contain
             only a single operation or 0-function. We use the method of iterated dominance
             frontiers described in Section 8.11 to transform the flowgraph to minimal SSA form,
             divide the basic blocks into one instruction per node, and then introduce SSA edges
             that connect the unique definition of a variable to each of its uses. These allow
             information to be propagated independent of the control flow of the program.
                 Then we perform a symbolic execution of the program using both the flowgraph
             edges and the SSA edges to transmit information. In the process, we mark nodes as
             executable only when the conditions for their execution are satisfied, and at each
             step, we process only executable nodes and nodes that have their SSA predecessors
             processed—this is what makes the method symbolic execution rather than data-flow
             analysis. We use the lattice pictured in Figure 12.30, where each C* is a possible
             constant value and tru e and f a l s e are included to provide lattice values for the
             results of conditional expressions. If ValType denotes the set { f a l s e , . . . , C_2 , C_i,
             Co, Ci, C2, . . . , tr u e }, then the lattice is called ConstLat. We associate a lattice
364           Early Optimizations

                                           T




              fa lse • • • C_ 2   C_i      0    C\   C2   • • • true


                                           x
 FIG. 12.30 The constant-propagation lattice ConstLat.


              element with each variable in the program at the exit from the unique flowgraph
              node that defines it. Assigning a variable the value T means that it may have an
              as-yet-undetermined constant value, while ± means that the value is not constant or
              cannot be determined to be constant. We initialize all variables with T.
                   We extend the representation of mir instructions in ican to include 0-functions,
              as follows:
                   VarNameO             0 ( V arN am el, . . . , VarNamen)
                         < k in d :p h ia s g n ,le f t : VarNameO, v a r s : [ V arNam el, . . . , VarNamen] >
              and define Exp_Kind(phiasgn) = listexp and Has_Left (phiasgn) = true.
                  We use two functions, Visit_Phi( ) and Visit_Inst( ), to process the nodes
              of the flowgraph. The first of these effectively executes ^-functions over the lattice
              values, and the latter does the same for ordinary statements.
                   The code to perform sparse conditional constant propagation is the routine
              Sparse_Cond_Const ( ) given in Figure 12.31. The algorithm uses two worklists,
              FlowWL, which holds flowgraph edges that need processing, and SSAWL, which holds
              SSA edges that need processing. The data structure ExecFlag(<z,fr) records whether
              the flowgraph edge a->b is executable. For each SSA-form variable 1/, there is a lattice
              cell LatCellCtO that records the lattice element associated with variable v on exit
              from the node that defines it. The function SSASucc(w) records the SSA successor
              edges of node «, i.e., the SSA edges that lead from node «. The code for the aux­
              iliary routines Edge_Count( ), Initialize ( ), Visit_Phi( ), and Visit_Inst( )
              is given in Figure 12.32. Four other procedures are used by these three routines, as
              follows:1
         1.   Exp(ms£) extracts the expression that is the right-hand side of inst if it is an assign­
              ment or that is the body of inst if it is a test.
         2.   Lat_Eval(ms£) evaluates the expression in inst with respect to the lattice values
              assigned to the variables in LatCellC ).
         3.   Edge_Set (k ,i,v al) returns the set {£ -> /} if val is a constant element of the given
              lattice and 0 otherwise.
         4.   Edge_Count (fc,£) returns the number of executable edges e in E such that e@2 = b.
                  We take as a simple example the program in Figure 12.33, which is already
              in minimal SSA-form with one instruction per node. The SSA edges are B1->B3,
              B2->B3, B4->B6, and B5->B6, so that, for example, SSASucc(B4) = {B4->B5}.
            Section 12.6    Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation           365


            LatCell: Var — > ConstLat
            FlowWL, SSAWL: set of (integer x integer)
            ExecFlag: (integer x integer) — > boolean
            Succ: integer — > set of integer
            SSASucc: integer — > (integer x integer)

            procedure Sparse_Cond_Const(ninsts,Inst,E ,EL,entry)
               ninsts: in integer
                Inst: in array [1**ninsts] of MIRInst
               E: in set of (integer x integer)
               EL: in (integer x integer) — > enum {Y,N}
                entry: in integer
            begin
               a, b: integer
               e: integer x integer
                I| initialize lattice cells, executable flags,
                I| and flow and SSA worklists
                Initialize(ninsts,E ,entry)
               while FlowWL * 0 V SSAWL * 0 do
                   if FlowWL * 0 then
                       e := ♦FlowWL; a := e@l; b := e@2
                       FlowWL -= {e}
                       II propagate constants along flowgraph edges
                       if !ExecFlag(a,b) then
                          ExecFlag(a,b) := true
                          if Inst[b].kind = phiasgn then
                             Visit_Phi(Inst [b])
                          elif Edge_Count(b,E) = 1 then
                             Visit_Inst(b,Inst[b],EL)
                          fi
                       fi
                   fi
                    II propagate constants along SSA edges
                   if SSAWL * 0 then
                       e := ♦SSAWL; a := e@l; b := e@2
                       SSAWL -= {el­
                       if Inst[b].kind = phiasgn then
                          Visit_Phi(Inst[b])
                       elif Edge.Count(b,E) ^ 1 then
                          Visit_Inst(b,Inst[b],EL)
                       fi
                   fi
               od
            end      || Sparse_Cond_Const

FIG* 12*31 SSA-based algorithm for sparse conditional constant propagation.
366            E arly O p tim iza tio n s


               procedure Edge.Count(b,E) returns integer
                  b: in integer
                  E: in set of (integer x integer)
               begin
                   I| return number of executable flowgraph edges leading to b
                   e: integer x integer
                   i := 0: integer
                  for each e e E do
                       if e@2 = b & ExecFlag(e@l,e@2) then
                            i += 1
                       fi
                   od
                  return i
               end     II Edge.Count

               procedure Initialize(ninsts,E ,entry)
                   ninsts: in integer
                   E: in set of (integer x integer)
                   entry: in integer
               begin
                   i, m, n: integer
                   p: integer x integer
                   FlowWL := {m->n e E where m = entry}
                   SSAWL := 0
                   for each p e E do
                        ExecFlag(p@l,p@2) := false
                   od
                   for i := 1 to ninsts do
                        if Has.Left(Inst[i].kind) then
                            LatCell(Inst[i].left) := t
                        fi
                   od
               end     || Initialize

 FIG . 12.32   Auxiliary routines for sparse conditional constant propagation.




               The algorithm begins by setting FlowWL = { e n t r y - > B l } , SSAWL = 0, all E x e c F la g ( )
               values to f a l s e , and all L a t C e l l ( ) values to t . It then rem oves e n tr y - > B l
               from FlowWL, sets E x e c F l a g ( e n t r y ,B 1 ) = t r u e , and calls V i s i t . I n s t ( B l ,
               " a i <- 2 " ) . V i s i t . I n s t ( ) evaluates the expression 2 in the lattice, sets
               L a t C e l l ( a i ) = 2 and SSAWL = {B 1 -> B 3 }. The main routine then sets FlowWL =
               {B 1 -> B 2 }. Since SSAWL is now non-empty, the main routine rem oves B1->B3 from
               SSAWL and calls V i s i t . I n s t (B 3 , " a i < b i " ) , and so on. The result is that the lattice
               cells are set to L a t C e l l ( a i ) = 2, L a t C e l l (b i) = 3, L a t C e l l ( c i ) = 4, L a t C e l l ( c 2)
               = t , and L a t C e l l ( 0 3 ) = 4. N ote that L a t C e l l ( c 2) is never changed because the al­
               gorithm determ ines that the edge from B3 to B5 is not executable. This inform ation
               can be used to delete blocks B3, B5, and B6 from the flow graph.
              Section 12.6     Sparse Conditional C onstant Propagation             367


              procedure Visit_Phi(inst)
                  inst: in MIRInst
              begin
                  j: integer
                  I| process 0 node
                  for j := 1 to linst.varsl do
                      LatCell(inst.left) n= LatCell(inst.varslj)
                  od
              end    II Visit_Phi

              procedure Visit_Inst(k,inst,EL)
                 k: in integer
                 inst: in MIRInst
                 EL: in (integer x integer) — > enum {Y,N}
              begin
                 i : integer
                 v: Var
                 I| process non-0 node
                 val := Lat_Eval(inst): ConstLat
                 if Has_Left(inst.kind) & val * LatCell(inst.left) then
                     LatCell(inst.left) n= val
                     SSAWL u= SSASucc(k)
                 fi
                 case Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
              binexp, unexp:
                     if val = t then
                         for each i e Succ(k) do
                            FlowWL u= {k-^i}
                         od
                     elif val * -L then
                         if |Succ(k)| = 2 then
                            for each i e Succ(k) do
                               if (val & EL(k,i) = Y) V (!val & EL(k,i) = N) then
                                  FlowWL u= {k-^i}
                               fi
                            od
                         elif |Succ(k)| = 1 then
                            FlowWL u= {k-^^Succ(k)}
                         fi
                     fi
              default:
                  esac
              end      II Visit_Inst

FIG . 12.32   (continued)
368               Early O p tim ization s




 FIG. 1 2 . 3 3   A simple example for sparse conditional constant propagation.




 FIG. 12.34 Another example for sparse conditional constant propagation.


                      As a second exam ple, consider the program in Figure 12.34. Figure 12.35 is the
                  minimal SSA-form translation of it, with one instruction per node.
                  The SSA edges are B1->B4, B2->B3, B3->B5, B3->B7, B4->B5, B5->B8,
                  B5->B11, B6->B7, B6->B8, B6->B9, B6->B10, B7->B10, B7->B4, B9->B11, and
             Section 12.6    Sparse Conditional Constant Propagation                            369




FIG. 12.35 Minimal SSA form of the program in Figure 12.34 with one instruction per basic block.


             B12->B3, so that, for example, SSASucc(B5) = {B5->B8, B5->B11}. The initializa­
             tion is the same as for the previous example. The final values of the lattice cells are
             as follows:

                 LatCell(ai) = 3
                 LatCell(di) = 2
                 LatCell(d3) = 2
                 LatCell(a3) = 3
                 LatCell(fi) = 5
                 LatCell(gi) = 5
                 LatCell(a2) = 3
37 0           Early O ptim izations




                                   B1


                                   B2


                                   B3


                                   B4


                                   B5


                                   B6


                                   B7


                                   B8


                                   B9


                                    B12


  FIG. 12.36 The result of doing sparse conditional constant propagation on the routine shown in
             Figure 12.35.



                   L a t C e l l ( f 2) = 6
                   L a t C e l l ( f 3) = ±
                   L a t C e ll( d 2) = 2

               and the resulting code (after replacing the variables with their constant values and
               removing unreachable code) is shown Figure 12.36.
                    It is only a matter of convenience that we have used nodes that contain a single
               statement each rather than basic blocks. The algorithm can easily be adapted to
               use basic blocks— it only requires, for example, that we identify definition sites of
               variables by the block number and the position within the block.
                    The time complexity of sparse conditional constant propagation is bounded by
               the number of edges in the flowgraph plus the number of SSA edges, since each
            Section 12.7    Wrap-Up                                                            371

            variable’s value can be lowered in the lattice only twice. Thus, it is 0(|E| + |SSA|),
            where SSA is the set of SSA edges. This is quadratic in the number of nodes in the
            worst case, but it is almost always linear in practice.




12.7        Wrap-Up
            In this chapter, we began our discussion of particular optimizations with constant-
            expression evaluation (constant folding), scalar replacement of aggregates, algebraic
            simplifications and reassociation, value numbering, copy propagation, and sparse
            conditional constant propagation. The first three are independent of data-flow ana­
            lysis, i.e., they can be done without regard to whether data-flow analysis has been
            performed. The last three begin the study of optimizations that depend on data-flow
            information for their effectiveness and correctness.
                 We summarize the topics and their significance in the optimization process as
            follows:

       1.   Constant folding is best structured as a subroutine that can be invoked from any
            place in the optimizer that can benefit from evaluation of a constant-valued expres­
            sion. It is essential that the compiler’s model of the data types and operations that
            participate in constant folding match those of the target architecture.
       2.   Scalar replacement of aggregates is best performed very early in the compilation
            process because it turns structures that are not usually subject to optimization into
            scalars that are.
       3.   Algebraic simplifications and reassociation, like constant folding, are best structured
            as a subroutine that can be invoked as needed. Algebraic simplification of addressing
            expressions and the other optimizations that apply to them, such as loop-invariant
            code motion if they occur in loops, are among the most important optimizations for
            a large class of programs.
       4.   Value numbering is an optimization that is sometimes confused with two oth­
            ers, namely, common-subexpression elimination and constant propagation; in its
            global form, it may also be confused with loop-invariant code motion and partial-
            redundancy elimination. They are all distinct, and the function of value numbering
            is to identify expressions that are formally equivalent and to remove redundant com­
            putations of those expressions that are equivalent, thus further reducing the amount
            of code the following optimizations are applied to.
       5.   Copy propagation replaces copies of variables’ values with uses of those variables,
            again reducing the amount of code.
       6.   Sparse conditional constant propagation replaces uses of variables that can be de­
            termined to have constant values with those values. It differs from all the other
            optimizations that require data-flow analysis in that it performs a somewhat more
372           Early O p tim ization s




 FIG. 12.37   Order of optimizations. The ones discussed in this chapter are highlighted in bold type.

              sophisticated analysis, namely, sym bolic execution, that takes advantage o f constant­
              valued conditionals to determine whether paths should be executed or not in the
              analysis.

                   Both global value numbering and sparse conditional constant propagation are
              performed on flowgraphs in SSA form and derive considerable benefit from using
              this form — in essence, the form er is global because o f its use and the second is more
              powerful than traditional global constant propagation because of it.
                   We place the optim izations discussed in this chapter in the overall suggested or­
              der o f optim izations as shown in Figure 12.37. These optim izations are highlighted
              in bold type.
            Section 12.8     Further Reading                                                      373




FIG. 12.37 (continued)



12.8        Further Reading
            The a n s i / i e e e standard for floating-point arithmetic is [IEEE85]. Goldberg’s intro­
            duction to the standard and overview of it and related issues is [Gold91]. The ap­
            plicability of constant folding and algebraic simplifications to floating-point values
            is discussed in [Farn 8 8 ] and [Gold91]. For an example of a compiler that performs
            scalar replacement of aggregates, see [Much91].
                 The original formulation of value numbering on basic blocks is [CocS69]. Its
            adaptation to extended basic blocks is found in [AusH82], and two methods of
            extending it to whole procedures are in [ReiL 8 6 ] and [AlpW8 8 ]. The use of value
            numbering in creating DAGs for basic blocks is described in, e.g., [AhoS8 6 ]. The
            partitioning algorithm used in the global value numbering process was developed by
            Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [AhoFI74]. Briggs, Cooper, and Simpson’s comparison
            of hash-based and global value numbering is in [BriC94c] and [Simp96], and Cooper
            and Simpson’s approach to value numbering on strongly connected components is
            in [CooS95b] and [Simp96].
                 Wegman and Zadeck’s sparse conditional constant propagation is described in
            [WegZ91]. An overview of symbolic execution, as used in that algorithm, is given in
            [MucJ81].
374           Early O ptim izations


12.9          Exercises
       12.1 The transformation called loop peeling removes one iteration from the beginning
            of a loop by inserting a copy of the loop body before the beginning of the loop.
            Performing loop peeling followed by constant propagation and constant folding on
            a procedure body can easily result in code to which the three transformations can be
            applied again. For example, the m i r code in (a) below is transformed in one step of
            loop peeling, constant propagation, and constant folding to the code in (b) below.
                        m <- 1                                   m <r- 1
                        i <r- 1                               i <r- 2
                  LI:   m <r- m * i                       LI: m <- m * i
                        i <- i + 1                            i <- i + 1
                        if i ^ 10 goto LI                     if i ^ 10 goto LI
                  (a)                                      (b)
              in another step to the code in (c) below, and ultimately to the code in (d)
                        m <r- 2                                  m <- 3628800
                        i <- 3                                   i <- 11
                  LI:   m <r- m * i
                        i <- i + 1
                        if i £ 10 goto LI
                  (c)                                     (d)
              assuming that there are no other branches to LI. How might we recognize such
              situations? How likely are they to occur in practice?
       12.2 It is essential to the correctness of constant folding that the compile-time evaluation
            environment be identical to the run-time environment or that the compiler simulate
            the run-time environment sufficiently well that it produces corresponding results. In
            particular, suppose we are compiling a program on an Intel 386 processor, which
            has only 80-bit internal floating-point values in registers (see Sections 21.4.1), to be
            run on a PowerPC processor, which has only single- and double-precision forms (see
            Section 21.2.1). H ow does this affect floating-point constant folding?
       12.3   (a) Write an i c a n program to do scalar replacement of aggregates, (b) What situa­
              tions are likely not to benefit from such replacements? (c) How can we guard against
              their being performed in the algorithm?
       12.4 (a) Write a canonicalizer or tree transformer in i c a n that accepts a tree and a set of
            tree-transformation rules and that applies the transformations to the tree until they
            no longer apply. Assume that the trees are represented by nodes of the i c a n data
            type Node, defined as follows:
                  Operator = enum {add,sub,mul}
                  Content = record {kind: enum {var,const},
                                    val: Var u Const}
                  Node = record {opr: Operator,
                                 lt,rt: Content u Node}
           Section 12.9    Exercises                                                        375


           (b) Prove that your canonicalizer halts for any tree input if it is given the transfor­
           mations represented in Figure 12.6.
     12.5 In the definition of Value_Number( ) in Figure 12.13, should there be a case for
          listexp in the case statement? If so, what would the code be for this alternative?
ADV 12.6 As indicated at the end of Section 12.4.2, [AlpW8 8 ] suggests doing structural analy­
         sis of the program to be analyzed and using special ^-functions that are designed for
         the control-flow constructs so as to be able to determine congruence with respect to
         control flow. Sketch how you would extend the global value-numbering algorithm
         to include this idea.
ADV 12.7 Can the global copy-propagation algorithm be modified to recognize cases such as
         the one in Figure 12.28? If so, how? If not, why not?
      12.8 Modify the (a) local and (b) global copy-propagation algorithms to work on ex­
           tended basic blocks.
ADV 12.9 Can copy propagation be expressed in a form analogous to sparse conditional
         constant propagation? If so, what advantages, if any, do we gain by doing so? If
         not, why not?
    12.10 Modify the sparse conditional constant-propagation algorithm to use basic blocks
          in place of individual statement nodes.
                                                                   CHAPTER 13



         Redundancy Elimination




T
         he optimizations covered in this chapter all deal with elimination of redun­
         dant computations and all require data-flow analysis. They can be done
         on either medium-level intermediate code (e.g., m ir ) or low-level code
         (e.g .9 l ir ).
     The first one, common-subexpression elimination, finds computations that are
always performed at least twice on a given execution path and eliminates the second
and later occurrences of them. This optimization requires data-flow analysis to
locate redundant computations and almost always improves the performance of
programs it is applied to.
     The second, loop-invariant code motion, finds computations that produce the
same result every time a loop is iterated and moves them out of the loop. While
this can be determined by an independent data-flow analysis, it is usually based on
using ud-chains. This optimization almost always improves performance, often very
significantly, in large part because it frequently discovers and removes loop-invariant
address computations and usually those that access array elements.
     The third, partial-redundancy elimination, moves computations that are at least
partially redundant (i.e., those that are computed more than once on some path
through the flowgraph) to their optimal computation points and eliminates totally
redundant ones. It encompasses common-subexpression elimination, loop-invariant
code motion, and more.
     The last, code hoisting, finds computations that are executed on all paths leading
from a given point in a program and unifies them into a single computation at that
point. It requires data-flow analysis (namely, a form of analysis with the somewhat
comical name “ very busy expressions” ) and decreases the space a program occupies,
but rarely affects its time performance.
     We choose to present both common-subexpression elimination and loop-
invariant code motion on the one hand and partial-redundancy elimination on the
other because both approaches have about the same efficiency and similar effects.

                                                                                  377
378    Redundancy Elimination


       A few years ago we would have presented only the former and merely mentioned
       the latter because the original formulation of partial-redundancy elimination re­
       quired a complicated and expensive bidirectional data-flow analysis. The modern
       formulation presented here eliminates that problem and also provides a framework
       for thinking about and formulating other optimizations. We can assert quite confi­
       dently that it will soon be, if it is not already, the approach of choice to redundancy
       elimination.



13.1   Common- Subexpression Elimination
       An occurrence of an expression in a program is a common subexpression1 if there is
       another occurrence of the expression whose evaluation always precedes this one in
       execution order and if the operands of the expression remain unchanged between the
       two evaluations. The expression a + 2 in block B3 in Figure 13.1(a) is an example of
       a common subexpression, since the occurrence of the same expression in B1 always
       precedes it in execution and the value of a is not changed between them. Common-
       subexpression elimination is a transformation that removes the recomputations of
       common subexpressions and replaces them with uses of saved values. Figure 13.1(b)
       shows the result of transforming the code in (a). Note that, as this example shows,
       we cannot simply substitute b for the evaluation of a + 2 in block B3, since B2
       changes the value of b if it is executed.
            Recall that value numbering and common-subexpression elimination are differ­
       ent, as shown by the examples at the beginning of Section 12.4.
            Also, note that common-subexpression elimination may not always be worth­
       while. In this example, it may be less expensive to recompute a + 2 (especially if a
       and d are both allocated to registers and adding a small constant to a value in a regis­
       ter can be done in a single cycle), rather than to allocate another register to hold the
       value of t l from B1 through B3, or, even worse, to store it to memory and later reload
       it. Actually, there are more complex reasons why common-subexpression elimina­
       tion may not be worthwhile that have to do with keeping a superscalar pipeline
       full or getting the best possible performance from a vector or parallel machine. As
       a result, we discuss its inverse transformation, called forward substitution, in Sec­
       tion 13.1.3.
            Optimizers frequently divide common-subexpression elimination into two
       phases, one local, done within each basic block, and the other global, done across an
       entire flowgraph. The division is not essential, because global common-subexpression
       elimination catches all the common subexpressions that the local form does and
       more, but the local form can often be done very cheaply while the intermediate code
       for a basic block is being constructed and may result in less intermediate code being
       produced. Thus, we describe the two forms separately in the next two subsections.



       1. It is traditional to use the term su b exp ression rather than exp ressio n , but the definition applies
       to arbitrary expressions, not just to those that are subexpressions of others.
              Section 13.1    Common-Subexpression Elimination                                     379




              (a)                                         (b)
  FIG. 13.1   (a) Example of a common subexpression, namely, a + 2, and (b) the result of doing
              common-subexpression elimination on it.


13.1.1        Local Common-Subexpression Elimination
              As noted above, local common-subexpression elimination works within single basic
              blocks and can be done either as the intermediate code for a block is being produced
              or afterward. For convenience, we assume that m ir instructions have been generated
              and occupy Block [m] [1 • • n in s t s [m] ] . Our method, essentially, keeps track of the
              available expressions, i.e., those that have been computed so far in the block and
              have not had an operand changed since, and, for each, the position in the block at
              which it was computed. Our representation of this is A EB, a set of quintuples of the
              form (pos, opd 1, opr, opd2, tmp), where pos is the position where the expression
              is evaluated in the basic block; o p d l, opr, and o p d l make up a binary expression;
              and tmp is either n i l or a temporary variable.
                   To do local common-subexpression elimination, we iterate through the basic
              block, adding entries to and removing them from AEB as appropriate, inserting
              instructions to save the expressions’ values in temporaries, and modifying the in­
              structions to use the temporaries instead. For each instruction inst at position /, we
              determine whether it computes a binary expression or not and then execute one of
              two cases accordingly. The (nontrivial) binary case is as follows:1

         1.   We compare in sfs operands and operator with those in the quintuples in A EB. If we
              find a match, say, (pos, opd 1, opr, o p d l, tmp), we check whether tmp is n i l . If it
              is, we
              (a) generate a new temporary variable name ti and replace the n i l in the identified
                  triple by it,
              (b) insert the instruction ti   opd 1 opr o p d l immediately before the instruction at
                  position pos, and
380            R ed u n d an cy E lim in atio n


               (c) replace the expression s in the instructions at positions p o s and i by ti.
               If we found a m atch with tmp = £/, where ti ± n i l , we replace the expression in inst
               by ti. If we did not find a m atch for in s fs expression in A E B , we insert a quintuple
               for it, with tmp = n i l , into A E B .

         2.    We check whether the result variable o f the current instruction, if there is one, occurs
               as an operan d in any element o i A E B . If it does, we remove all such quintuples from
               AEB.

                    The routine L o ca l_ C S E ( ) that im plem ents this approach is given in Figure 13.2.
               It uses four other routines, as follow s:

         1.    Renumber ( A E B , p o s) renum bers the first entry in each o f the quintuples in A E B , as
               necessary, to reflect the effect o f inserted instructions.

         2.    i n s e r t _ b e f o re ( ) inserts an instruction into a basic block and renum bers the in­
               structions to accom m odate the newly inserted one (see Section 4.8).

         3.    C om m utative (o p r) returns t r u e if the operator op r is com m utative, and f a l s e
               otherwise.

         4.    new_temp( ) returns a new tem porary as its value.


               AEBinExp = integer x Operand x Operator x Operand x Var

               procedure Local_CSE(m,ninsts,Block)
                  m: in integer
                  ninsts: inout array [••] of integer
                  Block: inout array [••] of array [••] of MIRInst
               begin
                  AEB := 0, Tmp: set of AEBinExp
                  aeb: AEBinExp
                  inst: MIRInst
                  i, pos: integer
                  ti: Var
                  found: boolean
                  i := 1
                  while i ^ ninsts[m] do
                     inst := Block[m][i]
                     found := false
                     case Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
               binexp: Tmp := AEB
                        while Tmp * 0 do
                           aeb := ♦Tmp; Tmp -= {aeb}
                           || match current instruction’s expression against those
                           I| in AEB, including commutativity
                           if inst.opr = aeb@3 & ((Commutative(aeb@3)
                                  & inst.opdl = aeb@4 & inst.opd2 = aeb@2)

  FIG . 13.2   A routine to do local common-subexpression elimination.
             Section 13.1      C om m on-Subexpression Elim ination                     381


                               V (inst.opdl = aeb@2 k inst.opd2 - aeb@4)) then
                               pos := aeb@l
                               found := true
                               II if no variable in tuple, create a new temporary and
                               II insert an instruction evaluating the expression
                               II and assigning it to the temporary
                               if aeb@5 = nil then
                                  ti := new_tmp( )
                                  AEB := (AEB - {aeb})
                                     u {(aeb@l,aeb@2,aeb@3,aeb@4,ti>}
                                  insert.before(m,pos,ninsts,Block,
                                     <kind:binasgn,left:t i,opdl:aeb@2,
                                     opr:aeb@3,opd2:aeb@4>)
                                  Renumber(AEB,pos)
                                  pos += 1
                                  i += 1
                                  I| replace instruction at position pos
                                  II by one that copies the temporary
                                  Block[m][pos] := <kind:valasgn,left:Block[m][pos].left,
                                     opd:<kind:var,val:ti>>
                               else
                                  ti := aeb@5
                               fi
                               I| replace current instruction by one that copies
                               II the temporary ti
                               Block[m][i] := (kind:valasgn,left:inst.left,
                                  opd:(kind:var,val:ti>>
                             fi
                          od
                          if !found then
                             I| insert new tuple
                             AEB u= {(i,inst.opdl,inst.opr,inst.opd2,nil)}
                          fi
                          || remove all tuples that use the variable assigned to by
                          || the current instruction
                          Tmp := AEB
                          while Tmp * 0 do
                             aeb := ♦Tmp; Tmp -= {aeb}
                             if inst.left = aeb@2 V inst.left = aeb@4 then
                                AEB -= {aeb}
                             fi
                          od
             default:
                   esac
                   i += 1
                od
             end    II Local.CSE

FIG , 13.2   (con tin u ed )
382            R ed u n d an cy E lim in ation

               Position       Instruction

               1              c <- a + b
               2              d <- m & n
               3              e <- b + d
               4              f <- a + b
               5              g <- -b
               6              h    b+a
               7              a <- j + a
               8              k     m&n
               9              j <- b + d
               10             a <- -b
               11             if m & n goto L2

  FIG . 13.3   Exam ple basic block before local common-subexpression elimination.


                    As an exam ple o f the algorithm , consider the code in Figure 13.3, which rep­
               resents w hat we w ould generate for a hypothetical basic block if we were not
               perform ing local com m on -subexpression elim ination as we generated it. Initially,
               AEB = 0 and i = 1. The first instruction has a b in e x p and AEB is empty, so we place
               the quintuple <1 , a , + , b , n i l > in AEB and set i = 2. The second instruction contains
               a b in e x p also; there is no quintuple in AEB with the sam e expression, so we insert
               < 2 ,m ,& ,n ,n il> into AEB and set i = 3. The form o f AEB is now

                    AEB = { < 1 , a , + , b , n i l > ,
                            < 2 ,m ,& ,n ,n il> >

               The sam e thing happens for instruction 3, resulting in

                    AEB = { < 1 , a , + , b , n i l > ,
                            < 2 ,m ,& ,n ,n i l > ,
                            < 3 ,b , + , d , n i l »

               and i = 4. N e x t we encounter f <- a + b in position 4 and find that the expression
               in it m atches the first quintuple in AEB. We insert t l into that quintuple in place o f
               the n i l , generate the instruction t l <r- a + b before position 1, renum ber the entries
               in AEB, replace the instruction that w as in position 1 but that is now in position 2 by
               c <r- t l , set i = 5, and replace the instruction in position 5 by f <- t l .
                    The current state o f the code is shown in Figure 13.4 and the value o f AEB is

                    AEB « { < 1 , a , + , b , t l > ,
                            < 3 ,m ,& ,n ,n i l > ,
                            < 4 ,b , + , d , n i l »

               N e x t we encounter the instruction g <— b in line 6 and do nothing. N ext we find
               h <r- b + a in line 7 and we recognize that the right-hand side m atches a quintuple
               in AEB; so we replace instruction 7 by h       t l . This produces the code shown in
               Figure 13.5. N e x t we find a <- j + a in line 8 and, for the first time, we remove
                Section 13.1       Common-Subexpression Elimination                                       383

                Position       Instruction

                1              tl     a+b
                2              c     tl
                3              d <r- m & n
                4              e <- b + d
                5              f < - tl
                6              g    “b
                7              h <- b + a
                8              a <- j + a
                9              k <- m & n
                10             j <- b + d
                11             a <— b
                12             if m & n goto L2
F IG . 1 3 .4   O ur exam ple basic block after elim inating the first local com m on su b exp ression (lines
                1, 2, and 5).



                Position       Instruction

                1              tl < — a + b
                2              c <- tl
                3              d <- m & n
                4              e <- b + d
                5              f <- tl
                6              g < - “b
                7              h <- tl
                8              a     j+a
                9              k <- m & n
                10             j     b+d
                11             a < — -b
                12             if m & n goto L2
F IG . 13.5     O ur exam ple basic block after elim inating the second local com m on su bexpression
                (line 7).



                a quintuple from AEB: the result variable a matches the first operand in the first
                quintuple in AEB, so we remove it, resulting in

                     AEB = {<3,m,&,n,nil>,
                            <4,b, + ,d,nil»

                Note that we insert a triple for j + a and remove it in the same iteration, since the
                result variable matches one of the operands.
384           Redundancy Elim ination

              Position    Instruction

              1           tl    a+b
              2           c <- tl
              3           t2 <— m & n
             4            d <- t2
              5           e <- b + d
              6           f    tl
              7          g <— b
              8          h <- tl
              9          a <- j + a
              10         k <- t2
              11          j   b+d
              12          a <— b
              13          if m & n goto L2

  FIG. 13.6 Our example basic block after eliminating the third local common subexpression.


                  N ext the expression m & n in line 9 in Figure 13.5 is recognized as a common
              subexpression. This results in the code in Figure 13.6 and the value for AEB becoming

                   AEB = {<3,m,&,n,t2>,
                          <5,b, + ,d,nil»

              Finally, the expression b + d in line 12 and the expression m & n in line 13 are recog­
              nized as local common subexpressions (note that we assume that m & n produces an
              integer value). The final value of AEB is

                   AEB = {<3,m,&,n,t2>,
                          <5,b, + ,d,t3»

             and the final code is as given in Figure 13.7.
                  In the original form of this code there are 11 instructions, 12 variables, and
             9 binary operations performed, while in the final form there are 14 instructions,
             15 variables, and 4 binary operations performed. Assuming all the variables occupy
             registers and that each of the register-to-register operations requires only a single
             cycle, as in any Rise and the more advanced cisc s, the original form is to be
             preferred, since it has fewer instructions and uses fewer registers. On the other
             hand, if some of the variables occupy memory locations or the redundant operations
             require more than one cycle, the result of the optimization is to be preferred. Thus,
             whether an optimization actually improves the performance of a block of code
             depends on both the code and the machine it is executed on.
                  A fast implementation of the local algorithm can be achieved by hashing the
             operands and operator in each triple, so that the actual operands and operator only
             need to be compared if the hash values match. The hash function chosen should be
             fast to compute and symmetric in the operands, so as to deal with commutativity
             efficiently, since commutative operators are more frequent than noncommutative
             ones.
             Section 13.1       Common-Subexpression Elimination                                385
             Position       Instruction

             1              t l <— a + b
             2              c     tl
             3              t2 <- m& n
             4              d     t2
             5              t3 < - b + d
             6              e     t3
             7              f <- t l
             8              g     -b
             9              h *- tl
             10             a *- j + a
             11             k * - t2
             12             j     t3
             13             a <— b
             14             i f t2 goto L2
  FIG. 13.7 Our example basic block after eliminating the last two local common subexpressions.

                 This algorithm and the global common-subexpression elimination algorithm
             that follows can both be improved by the reassociation transformations discussed
             in Section 12.3 (see also Section 13.4), especially those for addressing arithmetic,
             since they are the most frequent source of common subexpressions.


13.1.2       Global Common-Subexpression Elimination
             As indicated above, global common-subexpression elimination takes as its scope
             a flowgraph representing a procedure. It solves the data-flow problem known as
             available expressions, which we discussed briefly in Section 8.3 and which we now
             examine more fully. An expression exp is said to be available at the entry to a basic
             block if along every control-flow path from the entry block to this block there is
             an evaluation of exp that is not subsequently killed by having one or more of its
             operands assigned a new value.
                  We work out two versions of the data-flow analysis for available expressions.
             The first one tells us simply which expressions are available on entry to each block.
             The second also tells us where the evaluations of those expressions are, i.e., at what
             positions in what blocks. We do both because there is a difference of opinion among
             researchers of optimization as to whether using data-flow methods to determine the
             evaluation points is the best approach; see, for example, [AhoS86], p. 634, for advice
             that it is not.
                  In determining what expressions are available, we use EVAL(i) to denote the set
             of expressions evaluated in block i that are still available at its exit and KILL(i) to
             denote the set of expressions that are killed by block i. To compute EVAL(i), we
             scan block i from beginning to end, accumulating the expressions evaluated in it
             and deleting those whose operands are later assigned new values in the block. An
             assignment such as a       a + b, in which the variable on the left-hand side occurs
386          Redundancy Elimination




  FIG. 13.8 Example flowgraph for global common-subexpression elimination.


             also as an operand on the right-hand side, does not create an available expression
             because the assignment happens after the expression evaluation. For our example
             basic block in Figure 13.3, the EVAL( ) set is {m&n,b+d}.
                  The expression a + b is also evaluated in the block, but it is subsequently killed
             by the assignment a <- j + a, so it is not in the EVAL( ) set for the block. KILL(i)
             is the set of all expressions evaluated in other blocks such that one or more of their
             operands are assigned to in block /, or that are evaluated in block i and subsequently
             have an operand assigned to in block i. To give an example of a KILL( ) set, we
             need to have an entire flowgraph available,2 so we will consider the flowgraph in
             Figure 13.8. The EVAL(i) and K ILL(i) sets for the basic blocks are as follows:

             EVAL(entry) = 0                              K JLL(entry) = 0
             EVAL( Bl)   = {a + b ,a *c ,d *d }           KILL(B1)     = { c * 2 ,c > d ,a * c ,d * d ,i+ l,i> 1 0 }
             EVAL(B2)    = {a+b,c>d}                      K ILL( B2)   = {a *c ,c *2 }
             EVAL( B3)   = {a*c}                          KILL( B3)   = 0
             EVAL( B4)   = {d*d}                          KTLL(B4)    = 0



             2. Actually, this is not quite true. We could represent it by the set of variables assigned to in this
             block. This would be quite inefficient, however, since it would be a set of variables, while E V A L ( )
             is a set of expressions. Implementing the data-flow analysis by operations on bit vectors would then
             be awkward at best.
Section 13.1           Common-Subexpression Elimination                                          387

     EVAL( B5)            = {i>10}            K ILL( B5)        = 0
     EVAL(ex i t )         = 0                K IL L (e x it)   = 0
     Now, the equation system for the data-flow analysis can be constructed as fol­
lows. This is a forward-flow problem. We use AEirt(i) and AEout(i) to represent the
sets of expressions that are available on entry to and exit from block /, respectively.
An expression is available on entry to block i if it is available at the exits of all pre­
decessor blocks, so the path-combining operator is set intersection. An expression is
available at the exit from a block if it is either evaluated in the block and not sub­
sequently killed in it, or if it is available on entry to the block and not killed in it.
Thus, the system of data-flow equations is

     AEin(i)       =     |^|       AEout(j)
                       jePred(i)

     AEout(i) = EVAL(i) U (AEin(i) —KILL(i))
In solving the data-flow equations, we initialize AEin(i) = Uexp for all blocks /, where
Uexp can be taken to be the universal set of all expressions, or, as it is easy to show,

     U exp =   |J
               i
                    EVAL(i)


is sufficient.3
     For our example in Figure 13.8, we use

     Uexp = {a + b ,a *c ,d *d ,c > d ,i> 1 0 }

The first step of a worklist iteration produces

     AEm(entry) = 0

and the second step produces

     AEin{ Bl) = 0

Next, we compute
     AEin{ B2)            = {a+b,a*c,d*d}
     AEin( B3)            = {a+b,d*d,c>d}
     AEin( B4)            = {a+b,d*d,c>d}
     AEinifib)            = {a+b,d*d,c>d}
     AEin(ex i t )        = {a+b,d*d,c>d,i>10}
and additional iterations produce no further changes.
    Next, we describe how to perform global common-subexpression elimination
using the A E in {) data-flow function. For simplicity, we assume that local common-
subexpression elimination has already been done, so that only the first evaluation of

3. If we did not have a special entry node with no flow edges entering it, we would need to initialize
AEm(entry) = 0, since no expressions are available on entry to the flowgraph, while edges flowing
into the initial node might result in making A E i n ( ) for the entry block non-empty in the solution
to the equations.
388   Redundancy Elimination

      an expression in a block is a candidate for global com m on-subexpression elim ina­
      tion. We proceed as follow s:

          For each block i and expression exp e AEin(i) evaluated in block /,

          1.   Locate the first evaluation of exp in block /.

          2.   Search backward from the first occurrence to determine whether any of
               the operands of exp have been previously assigned to in the block. If so,
               this occurrence of exp is not a global common subexpression; proceed to
               another expression or another block as appropriate.
          3.   Having found the first occurrence of exp in block i and determined that it is
               a global common subexpression, search backward in the flowgraph to find
               the occurrences of exp, such as in the context v <- exp, that caused it to be
               in AEin(i). These are the final occurrences of exp in their respective blocks;
               each of them must flow unimpaired to the entry of block /; and every flow
               path from the e n try block to block i must include at least one of them.
          4.   Select a new temporary variable tj. Replace the expression in the first in­
               struction inst that uses exp in block i by tj and replace each instruction that
               uses exp identified in step (3) by
                      tj <r- exp
                      R eplace(in st, ex p , tj)

               where Replace(inst,exp,tj) returns the instruction inst with exp replaced
               by tj.

           A routine called Global_CSE( ) that im plem ents this approach is given in Figure
      13.9. The routine Find_Sources( ) locates the source occurrences o f a global com ­
      mon su bexpression and returns a set o f pairs consisting o f the block number and the
      instruction num ber within the block. The routine insert_after( ) is as described
      in Section 4.8. The routine Replace.Exp(Block,i , j , t j ) replaces the instruction in
      Block [/] [/] by an instruction that uses opd: <kind: var ,val:£/>, that is, it replaces
      a binasgn by the corresponding valasgn, a binif by a valif, and a bintrap by a
      valtrap.
           Proper choice o f data structures can m ake this algorithm run in linear time.
           In our exam ple in Figure 13.8 , the first expression occurrence that satisfies the
      criteria for being a global com m on subexpression is a + b in block B2. Searching
      back w ard from it, we find the instruction c ^ a + b i n B l and replace it by
          tl < — a + b
          c <— t 1

      and the instruction in block B2 by f [ i ] <- t l . Similarly, the occurrence o f d * d in
      B4 satisfies the criteria, so we replace the instruction in which it occurs by
      g [i]    t 2 and the assignm ent in block B1 that defines the expression by
          t2 <r- d * d
          e <r- t 2

      The result is the flow graph shown in Figure 13.10.
              Section 13.1              Common-Subexpression Elimination                                             389


              BinExp = Operand x O perator x Operand

              procedure G lob al_C SE (n b lock s, n i n s t s , B lo c k , AEin)
                 n b lo c k s: in in te g e r
                 n in s t s : inout a rra y [ 1 * * n b lock s] of in te g e r
                 B lock: inout a r r a y [ 1 • • n b lock s] of a rra y [ • • ] of MIRInst
                 AEin: in in te g e r —> BinExp
              begin
                 i , j , k: in te g e r
                 1, t j : Var
                 S: s e t of (in te g e r x in te g e r )
                 s : in te g e r x in te g e r
                 a e x p : BinExp
                 f o r i := 1 to n block s do
                      fo r each aexp e A E in (i) do
                               j •= 1
                               w hile j < n in s t s [ i] do
                                   ca se E x p .K in d ( B lo c k [ i] [ j] .k in d ) of
              binexp:                  i f aexp@l = B l o c k [ i ] [ j ] . opdl
                                           & aexp@2 = B lo c k [i] [ j ] . o p r
                                           & aexp@3 = B l o c k [ i ] [ j] .o p d 2 then
                                           f o r k := j- 1 by -1 to 1 do
                                                i f H a s .L e f t ( B lo c k [ i] [ k ] .k in d )
                                                     & ( B l o c k [ i ] [ k ] . l e f t = aexp @ l.v al
                                                     V B l o c k [ i ] [ k ] . l e f t = aexp@ 3.val) then
                                                     goto LI
                                                fi
                                           od
                                           S : = F in d .S o u r c e s(a e x p ,n b lo c k s ,n in s ts,B lo c k )
                                           t j := new_tmp( )
                                           R e p la ce .E x p (B lo ck , i , j , t j )
                                           f o r each s e S do
                                                1 : * B lo c k [s @ l][s @ 2 ].le ft
                                                B lo c k [ s @ l][ s @ 2 ].le ft : * t j
                                                in s e r t _ a f t e r ( s @ l , s@2, n i n s t s , B lo c k ,
                                                     <k in d : v a la s g n , l e f t :1 ,
                                                     o p d :< k in d :v a r ,v a l:t j> > )
                                                     j += 1
                                                od
                                           fi
              d e f a u lt :        e sa c
              L I:                  j += 1
                               od
                         od
                    od
              end          || G lobal.C SE

F IG . 13.9   A routine to implement our first approach to global com m on-subexpression elimination.
390          Redundancy Elimination




 FIG. 13.10 Our example flowgraph from Figure 13.8 after global common-subexpression
            elimination.

                  The global CSE algorithm can be implemented efficiently by mapping the set of
             expressions that occur in a program to a range of consecutive integers beginning with
             zero, each of which, in turn, corresponds to a bit-vector position. The set operations
             translate directly to bit-wise logical operations on the bit vectors.
                  The second approach for performing global common-subexpression elimination
             both determines the available expressions and, at the same time, determines for each
             potential common subexpression the point(s)—i.e., basic block and position within
             basic block—of the defining assignment(s). This is done by modifying the data-flow
             analysis to deal with individual expression occurrences. We define EVALP(i) to be
             the set of triples (exp, /, pos), consisting of an expression exp, the basic-block name
             /, and an integer position pos in block /, such that exp is evaluated at position pos
             in block i and is still available at the exit of the block. We define KILLP(i) to be the
             set of triples (exp, blkypos) such that exp satisfies the conditions for KILL(i) and
             blk and pos range over the basic block and position pairs at which exp is defined in
             blocks other than i. Finally, we define


                 AEinP(i) =       p|       AEoutP(j)
                               jePred(i)

                 AEoutPd) = EVALP(i) U (AEinP(i) - K ILLP(i))
Section 13.1     Common-Subexpression Elimination                                           391

The initialization is analogous to that for the previous set of data-flow equations:
AEinP(i) = U for all i, where U is appropriately modified to include position infor-
mation.
    Now, for our example in Figure 13.8, we have the following EVALP{ ) and
KILLP( ) sets:
    EVALP(e ntry)       =0
    EVALP( Bl)          = {(a + b ,B l, l),(a *c ,B1,2),<d*d,Bl ,3)}
    EVALP( B2)          = {(a+b,B2, l),(c>d,B2,3>)
    EVALP{ B3)          = {(a *c ,B 3 ,l)}
    EVALP{ B4)          = {(d *d ,B 4 ,l)}
    EVALP{ B5)          = {<i>10,B5,2)}
    EVALP(ex i t )      =0

    K1LLP (entry)       =0
    KILLP( Bl)          = {< c*2 ,B 2 ,2 ),{c > d ,B 2 ,3 ),{a*c ,B 3 ,l),{d *d ,B 4 ,1),
                           (i+ l,B 5 , l),(i> 1 0 ,b 5 ,2 )}
    KILLP{ B2)          = {(a *c ,B l,2 ),{a *c ,B 3 ,l),(c *2 ,B 2 ,2 ))
    K1LLP( B3)          =0
    KILLP( B4)          =0
    KILLP( B5)          =0
    KILLP(ex i t )      =0
and the result of performing the data-flow analysis is as follows:
    AEinP(e ntry)      =0
    AEinP( Bl)         =0
    AEinP{ B2)         = {(a + b ,B l, l),(d *d ,B l ,3)}
    AEinP{ B3)         = {(a + b ,B l,l),(d *d ,B l,3 ),(c> d ,B 2 ,3 )}
    AEinP{ B4)         = {(a + b ,B l, l),(d *d ,B l ,3),(c>d,B2,3)}
    AEinP{ B5)         = {(a + b ,B l, l),(d *d ,B l ,3),(c>d,B2,3)}
    AEinP(ex i t )     = {(a+ b ,B l, l),(d *d ,B l ,3>,(c>d,B2,3),{i>10,B5,2)}
so the available expression instances are identified for each global common subex­
pression, with no need to search the flowgraph for them. The transformation of our
example flowgraph proceeds as before, with no change, except that the transforma­
tion algorithm is simpler, as follows:

              For each block i and expression exp such that {exp, blk, pos) e AEinP(i)
         for some blk and pos, and in which exp is evaluated in block /,
    1.   Locate the first evaluation of exp in block /.
    2.   Search backward from the first occurrence to determine whether any of
         the operands of exp have been previously assigned to in the block. If so,
         this occurrence of exp is not a global common subexpression; proceed to
         another expression or another block, as appropriate.
    3. Having found the first occurrence of exp in block i and having deter­
       mined that it is a global common subexpression, let {exp, blk\, p o sj),. . . ,
392            Redundancy Elimination
               BinExp = Operand x Operator * Operand
               BinExpIntPair * BinExp x integer x integer
               BinExpIntPairSet * BinExp x set of (integer x integer)

               procedure Global_CSE_Pos(nblocks,ninsts,Block,AEinP)
                  nblocks: in integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
                  Block: inout array[1••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                  AEinP: in integer — > BinExpIntPairSet
               begin
                  i, j, k: integer
                  tj , v: Var
                  s: integer x integer
                  inst: MIRInst
                  aexp: BinExpIntPairSet
                  AEinPS: integer — > BinExpIntPairSet
                  AEinPS := Coalesce.Sets(nblocks,AEinP)
                  for i := 1 to nblocks do
                      for each aexp e AEinPS(i) do
                          j •= 1
                          while j < ninsts[i] do
                             inst := Block[i] [j]
                             case Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
               binexp:          if aexp@l@l = inst.opdl & aexp@l@2 * inst.opr
                                   & aexp@l@3 = inst.opd2 then
                                   for k := j-1 by -1 to 1 do
                                      if Has_Left(inst.kind)
                                         & (inst.left * aexp@l@l.val
                                         V inst.left * aexp@l@3.val) then
                                         goto LI
                                      fi
                                   od
                                   tj := new_tmp( )
                                   Replace_Exp(Block,i,j ,tj)

 FIG . 13.11   Routines to implement our second approach to global common-subexpression
               elimination.


                         (exp, blkn, p osn) be the elements of AEinP(i) with exp as the expression
                         part. Each of them is an instruction inst that evaluates exp.

                    4.   Select a new temporary variable tj. Replace the identified occurrence of exp
                         in block i by tj and replace each identified instruction inst that evaluates
                         exp at position posk in block blkk by
                              tj <- exp
                              R eplace (inst, exp, tj)

                    An ican routine called G lo b a l_ C S E _ P o s( ) that implements this second ap ­
               proach is given in Figure 13.11. It uses the routine C o a le s c e _ S e t s ( ) shown in
               the sam e figure. The routine i n s e r t . a f t e r ( ) and R e p la c e ( ) are the sam e as that
               used in Figure 13.9.
             Section 13.1            Common-Subexpression Elimination                         393


                                           for each s e aexp@2 do
                                                v    Block [s@l][s@2].left
                                                Block[s@l][s@2].left      tj
                                                insert_after(s@l,s@2,<kind:valasgn,left:v ,
                                                   opd:<kind:var,val:t j >>)
                                                j += 1
                                           od
                                      fi
             default:             esac
             LI:                  j += 1
                             od
                        od
                   od
             end         || Global_CSE_Pos

             procedure Coalesce_Sets(n,AEinP) returns integer —> BinExpIntPairSet
                n: in integer
                 AEinP: in integer — > set of BinExpIntPair
             begin
                AEinPS, Tmp: integer — > BinExpIntPairSet
                 i: integer
                 aexp: set of BinExpIntPair
                a, b: BinExpIntPairSet
                 change: boolean
                for i      1 to n do
                    AEinPS(i) := 0
                    for each aexp e AEinP(i) do
                        AEinPS(i) u= {<aexp@l,{<aexp@2,aexp@3>>»
                    od
                    Tmp(i) := AEinPS(i)
                    repeat
                        change := false
                        for each a e AEinPS(i) do
                           for each b e AEinPS(i) do
                              if a * b k a@l = b@l then
                                 Tmp(i) := (Tmp(i) - {a,b}) u {<a@l,a@2 u b @2»
                                 change := true
                              fi
                           od
                        od
                    until !change
                 od
                return Tmp
             end      II Coalesce_Sets

FIG. 13.11   (continued)
394           Redundancy Elim ination




              (a)                                      (b)
 FIG. 13.12   Combining common-subexpression elimination with copy propagation: (a) the original
              flowgraph, and (b) the result of local common-subexpression elimination.


                   The second global CSE algorithm can be implemented efficiently by mapping the
              set of triples for the expression occurrences in a program to a range of consecutive
              integers beginning with zero, each of which, in turn, corresponds to a bit-vector
              position. The set operations translate directly to bit-wise logical operations on the
              bit vectors.
                   Note that local and global common-subexpression elimination can be combined
              into one pass by using individual instructions as flowgraph nodes. Although this
              approach is feasible, it is generally not desirable, since it usually makes the data­
              flow analysis significantly more expensive than the split approach described above.
              Alternatively, larger units can be used: both the local and global analyses and opti­
              mizations can be done on extended basic blocks.
                   Also, local and global common-subexpression elimination may be repeated,
              with additional benefit, if they are combined with copy propagation and/or constant
              propagation. As an example, consider the flowgraph in Figure 13.12(a). Doing local
              common-subexpression elimination on it results in the changes to block B1 shown
              in Figure 13.12(b). Now global common-subexpression elimination replaces the
              occurrences of a + b in blocks B2 and B4 by temporaries, producing the flowgraph in
              Figure 13.13(a). N ext, local copy propagation replaces the uses of tl and t2 in block
              B1 by t3, resulting in Figure 13.13(b). Finally, global copy propagation replaces the
              occurrences of c and d in blocks B2, B3, and B4 by t3, with the resulting code shown
              in Figure 13.14. Note that dead-code elimination can now remove the assignments
              t 2 <- t3 and tl       t3 in block Bl.
                   On the other hand, one can easily construct, for any «, an example that benefits
              from n repetitions of these optimizations. While possible, this hardly ever occurs in
              practice.
             Section 13.1    Common-Subexpression Elimination                                 395




             (a)                                      (b)
FIG. 13.13   Combining common-subexpression elimination with copy propagation (continued from
             Figure 13.12): (a) after global common-subexpression elimination, and (b) after local
             copy propagation.




FIG. 13.14   Combining common-subexpression elimination with copy propagation (continued from
             Figure 13.13): after global copy propagation. Note that dead-code elimination can now
             eliminate the assignments t2 <- t3 and t l <- t3 in block B1 and that code hoisting
             (Section 13.5) can move the two evaluations of t3 + t3 to block Bl.
396           Redundancy Elimination




              (a)                        (b)
 FIG* 13.15 In (a), two registers are needed along the edge from block B1 to B2, while in (b), three
            registers are needed.




13.1.3        Forward Substitution
              Forward substitution is the inverse of common-subexpression elimination. Instead
              of replacing an expression evaluation by a copy operation, it replaces a copy by
              a reevaluation of the expression. While it may seem that common-subexpression
              elimination is always valuable— because it appears to reduce the number of ALU
              operations performed—this is not necessarily true; and even if it were true, it is still
              not necessarily advantageous. In particular, the simplest case in which it may not
              be desirable is if it causes a register to be occupied for a long time in order to hold
              an expression’s value, and hence reduces the number of registers available for other
              uses, or—and this may be even worse—if the value has to be stored to memory and
              reloaded because there are insufficient registers available. For example, consider the
              code in Figure 13.15. The code in part (a) needs two registers on the edge from
              B1 to B2 (for a and b), while the code in (b), which results from global common-
              subexpression elimination, requires three (for a, b, and t l ) .
                   Depending on the organization of a compiler, problems of this sort may not be
              discovered until well after common-subexpression elimination has been done; in par­
              ticular, common-subexpression elimination is often done on medium-level interme­
              diate code, while register allocation and possibly concomitant spilling of a common
              subexpression’s value to memory generally are not done until after machine-level
              code has been generated. This situation, among other reasons, argues for doing
              common-subexpression elimination and most other global optimizations on low-
              level code, as in the IBM X L compilers for power and PowerPC (see Section 21.2)
              and the Hewlett-Packard compilers for pa-risc .
                   Performing forward substitution is generally easy. In mir , one has an assign­
              ment of a temporary variable to some other variable such that the assignment to
              the temporary is the result of an expression evaluation performed earlier in the
              flowgraph. One checks that the operands of the expression are not modified be­
              tween the evaluation of the expression and the point it is to be forward substi­
              tuted to. Assuming that they have not been modified, one simply copies the ex­
              pression evaluation to that point and arranges that its result appear in the proper
              location.
            Section 13.2       Loop-Invariant C ode M otion                                                     397



13.2        Loop-Invariant Code Motion
            L o o p -in v aria n t code m otio n recognizes computations in loops that produce the same
            value on every iteration of the loop and moves them out of the loop.4
                  Many, but not all, of the most important instances of loop-invariant code are
            addressing computations that access elements of arrays, which are not exposed to
            view and, hence, to optimization until we have translated a program to an interme­
            diate code like m i r or to a lower-level one. As a simple example of loop-invariant
            computations — w ith out exposing array addressing—consider the Fortran code in
            Figure 13.16(a),5 which can be transformed to that shown in Figure 13.16(b). This
            saves nearly 10,000 multiplications and 5,000 additions in roughly 5,000 iterations
            of the inner loop body. Flad we elaborated the addressing computations, we would
            have made available additional loop invariants in the computation of a ( i , j ) similar
            to those shown in the examples in Section 12.3.1.
                  Identifying loop-invariant computations is simple. Assume that we have identi­
            fied loops by a previous control-flow analysis and computed ud-chains by a previous
            data-flow analysis, so we know which definitions can affect a given use of a vari­
            able.6 Then the set of loop-invariant instructions in a loop is defined inductively,
            i.e., an instruction is loop-invariant if, for each of its operands:
       1.   the operand is constant,
       2.   all definitions that reach this use of the operand are located outside the loop, or
       3.   there is exactly one definition of the operand that reaches the instruction and that
            definition is an instruction inside the loop that is itself loop-invariant.
            Note that this definition allows the set of loop-invariant computations for the loop
            to be computed as follows:7
       1.   In each step below, record the sequence in which instructions are determined to be
            loop-invariant.
       2.   First, mark as loop-invariant the constant operands in the instructions.


            4. Note that if a computation occurs inside a nested loop, it may produce the same value for every
            iteration of the inner loop(s) for each particular iteration of the outer loop(s), but different values
            for different iterations of the outer loop(s). Such a computation will be moved out of the inner
            loop(s), but not the outer one(s).
            5. The official syntax of Fortran 77 requires that a do loop begin with “ do n v - . . where n
            is a statement number and v is a variable, and end with the statement labeled n. However, it is
            customary in the compiler literature to use the “ do v = . . . ” and “ enddo” form we use here instead,
            and we do so throughout this book.
            6. If we do not have ud-chains available, the identification of loop invariants can still be carried out,
            but it requires checking, for each use, which definitions might flow to it, i.e., in effect, computing
            ud-chains.
            7. We could formulate this as an explicit data-flow analysis problem, but there is little point
            in doing so. As is, it uses ud- and du-chains implicitly in computing Reach_Defs_0ut( ) and
            Reach_Defs_In( ).
398            R e d u n d a n c y Elim in atio n


               do i = 1, 100                         tl = 10 * (n + 2)
                  1 = i * (n + 2)                    t2 = 100 * n
                  do j = i, 100                      do i = 1, 100
                     a(i,j) = 100 * n                   t3 = t2 + i * tl
                        + 10 * 1 + j                    do j = i, 100
                  enddo                                    a(i,j) = t3 + j
               enddo                                    enddo
                                                     enddo
               (a)                                   (b)
 FIG. 13.16 (a) Example of loop-invariant computations in Fortran, and (b) the result of
            transforming it.

          3.   Next, mark the operands that have all definitions that reach them located outside
               the loop.
          4.   Then, mark as loop-invariant instructions that (a) have all operands marked as loop-
               invariant, or (b) that have only one reaching definition and that definition is an
               instruction in the loop that is already marked loop-invariant, and there are no uses of
               the variable assigned to by that instruction in the loop located before the instruction.
          5.   Repeat steps 2 through 4 above until no operand or instruction is newly marked as
               invariant in an iteration.
               Figure 13.17 shows a pair of routines that implement this algorithm. We use bset
               to denote the set of indexes of basic blocks that make up a loop. Mark_Invar( )

               Instlnvar: (integer x integer) — > boolean
               InvarOrder: sequence of (integer x integer)
               Succ: integer — > set of integer

               procedure Mark_Invar(bset,en,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                  bset: in set of integer
                  en, nblocks: in integer
                  ninsts: in array [1 ••nblocks] of integer
                  Block: in array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
               begin
                  i, j : integer
                  change: boolean
                  Order :* Breadth.First(bset,Succ,en): sequence of integer
                  InvarOrder :* []
                  for i := 1 to nblocks do
                     for j :s 1 to ninsts[i] do
                         InstInvar(i,j) := false
                     od
                  od
                  repeat
                     change := false
                      II process blocks in loop in breadth-first order

 FIG. 13.17 Code to mark loop-invariant instructions in a loop body.
             Section 13.2   L oop-In varian t C o d e M o tion                          399


                   for i := 1 to IOrder I do
                      change V= Mark_Block(bset,en,Orderli,
                         nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                   od
                until !change
             end    II Mark_Invar

             procedure Mark_Block(bset,en,i,nblocks,ninsts,Block) returns boolean
                bset: in set of integer
                 en, i, nblocks: in integer
                ninsts: in array [1*-nblocks] of integer
                Block: in array [1•-nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
             begin
                j: integer
                 inst: MIRInst
                 change := false: boolean
                for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                    I| check whether each instruction in this block has loop-constant
                    II operands and appropriate reaching definitions; if so,
                    I| mark it as loop-invariant
                    if !InstInvar(i,j) then
                       inst := Block[i] [j]
                       case Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
             binexp:      if Loop_Const(inst.opdl,bset,nblocks,ninsts, Block)
                             V Reach.Defs_0ut(Block,inst.opdl,i,bset)
                             V Reach_Defs_In(Block,inst.opdl,i,j,bset) then
                             InstInvar(i,j) := true
                          fi
                          if Loop_Const(inst.opd2,bset,nblocks,ninsts, Block)
                             V Reach_Defs_0ut(Block,inst.opd2,i,bset)
                             V Reach_Defs_In(Block,inst.opd2,i,j,bset) then
                             Instlnvar(i,j) &= true
                          fi
             unexp:       if Loop.Const(inst.opd,bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                             V Reach_Defs_0ut(Block,inst.opd,i,bset)
                             V Reach_Defs_In(Block,inst.opd,i,j,bset) then
                             Instlnvar(i,j) := true
                          fi
             default: esac
                    fi
                    if Instlnvar(i,j) then
                       II record order in which loop invariants are found
                       InvarOrder ®= [<i,j>]
                       change := true
                    fi
                 od
                 return change
             end     II Mark_Block

FIG. 13.17   (continued)
400           Redundancy Elimination


              initializes the data structures and then calls Mark_Block( ) for each block in the
              loop in breadth-first order, which marks the loop-invariant instructions in the block.
              The functions used in the code are as follows:
         1.   B r e a d th .F ir st (bset ,Succ ,en) returns a sequence that enumerates the blocks in
              bset in breadth-first order, where en is the entry block of bset (see Figure 7.13).
         2.   Loop_Const (opn d, bset ,n blocks ,n i n s t s , Block) determines whether opnd is a
              loop constant in the loop made up of the blocks whose indexes are in bset.
         3.   Reach.D efs_0ut (B lo c k ,o p n d ,i, bset) returns tru e if all definitions of opnd that
              reach block i are in blocks whose indexes are not in bset and f a l s e otherwise.
         4.   Reach.D efs_ ln (B lo c k , opnd 9i 9j 9bset) returns tru e if there is exactly one defini­
              tion of opnd that reaches Block [/] [/]; that definition is in the loop consisting of
              the blocks in bset, is marked as loop-invariant, and is executed before Block [/] [/];
              and there are no uses of the result variable (if any) of Block [/] [/] in the loop before
              instruction j in block /. Otherwise it returns f a l s e .
                  As an example of Mark_Invar ( ), consider the flowgraph shown in Figure 13.18.
              Calling
                  M ark_Invar( { 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 } , 2 , 8 , n i n s t s , Block)




 FIG. 13.18 An example for loop-invariant code motion.
Section 13.2    Loop-Invariant Code Motion                                         401

results in setting Order = [2,3,4,5,6], initializing all Inst Invar (i,/) to false,
and setting change = false, followed by invoking Mark_Block( ) for each block in
the breadth-first order given by Order. Applying Mark_Block( ) to block B2 exe­
cutes the binexp case for Block[2] [1], which leaves InstInvar(2,1) unchanged
and returns false.
     Applying Mark_Block( ) to block B3 executes the binexp case for Block [3] [1],
which sets Inst Invar (3,1) = true and InvarOrder = [<3,1>]. Next it executes
the unexp case for Block [3] [2], which sets Inst Invar (3,2) = true, InvarOrder =
[<3,1>,<3,2>],and returns true. Next itexecutes the binexp case for Block [3] [3],
which leaves Inst Invar (3,3) and InvarOrder unchanged and returns true.
     Applying Mark_Block( ) to block B4 executes the binexp case, for Block [4] [1],
which leaves Inst Invar (4,1) unchanged. Next it executes the binexp case for
Block [4] [2], which leaves Inst Invar (4,2) unchanged and returns false.
     Applying Mark_Block( ) to block B5 executes the unexp case for Block [5] [1],
which leaves InstInvar(5,1) unchanged. Next it executes the binexp case for
Block[5][2], which sets InstInvar(5,2) = true, InvarOrder = [<3,1>,<3,2>,
<5,2>], and returns true.
     Applying Mark_Block( ) to block B6 executes the binexp case for Block [6] [1],
which leaves InstInvar(6,1) unchanged. Next it executes the binexp case for
Block [6] [2], which determines that Block [6] [2] is loop-invariant, so it sets
InstInvar(6,2) = true, InvarOrder = [<3,1>,<3,2>,<5,2>,<6,2>],and returns
true.
     Now change = tru e in M ark.Invar ( ), so we execute Mark_Block( ) again for
each block in the loop. The reader can check that no further instructions are marked
as loop-invariant and no further passes of the while loop are executed.
     Note that the number of instructions that may be determined by this method
to be loop-invariant may be increased if we perform reassociation of operations
during determination of the invariants. In particular, suppose we have the mir code
in Figure 13.19(a) inside a loop, where i is the loop index variable and j is loop-
invariant. In such a case, neither mir instruction is loop-invariant. However, if we
reassociate the additions as shown in Figure 13.19(b), then the first instruction is
loop-invariant. Also, note that our definition of loop invariant needs to be restricted
somewhat to be accurate, because of the potential effects of aliasing. For example,
the mir instruction
    m <r- call f ,(1,int;2,int)

may be loop-invariant, but only if the call produces the same result each time it
is called with the same arguments and has no side effects, which can be found
out only by interprocedural analysis (see Chapter 19). Thus the list exp case in
Mark_Block( ) leaves Inst Invar (/,/) = false.
     Now, having identified loop-invariant computations, we can move them to the
preheader of the loop containing them (see Section 7.4). On the face of it, it would
seem that we could simply move each instruction identified as loop-invariant, in the
order they were identified, to the preheader. Unfortunately, this approach is often
too aggressive in practice. There are two possible sources of error that this method
introduces (as illustrated in Figure 13.20). Note that these possible errors apply only
402            Redundancy Elim ination


               tl <- i + j              t2 <- j + 1
               n tl + 1                 n <- i + t2
               (a)                       (b)
 FIG. 13.19 Example of a computation in (a) for which reassociation results in recognition of a
               loop-invariant in (b).




               (a)                                       (b)

 FIG. 13.20 Illustrations of two flaws in our basic approach to code motion. In both cases, if n <- 2
            is moved to the preheader, it is always executed, although originally it might have been
            executed only in some iterations or in none.


               to assignment instructions. Thus, if we had a loop-invariant conditional, say, a < 0,
               then it would always be safe to replace it by a temporary t and to put the assignment
               t <- a < 0 in the preheader. The situations are as follows:1
          1.   All uses of a moved assignment’s left-hand-side variable might be reached only by
               that particular definition, while originally it was only one of several definitions that
               might reach the uses. The assignment might be executed only in some iterations of
               the loop, while if it were moved to the preheader, it would have the same effect as if it
               were executed in every iteration of the loop. This is illustrated in Figure 13.20(a): the
               use of n in block B5 can be reached by the value assigned it in both the assignments
               n <r- 0 and n     2. Yet if n   2 is moved to the preheader, n is assigned the value 2
               regardless.
          2.   The basic block originally containing an instruction to be moved might not be
               executed during any pass through the loop. This could happen if execution of the
               basic block were conditional and it could result in a different value’s being assigned
               to the target variable or the occurrence of an exception for the transformed code that
               would not occur in the original code. It could also happen if it were possible that
               the loop body might be executed zero times, i.e., if the termination condition were
     Section 13.2     Loop-Invariant Code Motion                                               403


     satisfied immediately. This is illustrated in Figure 13.20(b): the assignment n <r- 2 is
     not executed if the block containing it is bypassed for every pass through the loop,
     yet if it is moved to the preheader, n is assigned the value 2 regardless. This can be
     protected against by requiring that the basic block dominate all exit blocks of the
     loop (where an exit block is one that has a successor outside the loop), because then
     it must be executed on some iteration.

         To fix the algorithm, we need a condition to guard against each of these situ­
     ations. Let v be the variable assigned to by an instruction that is a candidate for
     movement to the preheader. Then the conditions are as follows:

1.   The statement defining v must be in a basic block that dominates all uses of v in the
     loop.
2.   The statement defining v must be in a basic block that dominates all exit blocks of
     the loop.

     With these provisos, the resulting algorithm is correct, as follows: Move each in­
     struction identified as loop-invariant and satisfying conditions (1) and (2) above, in
     the order they were identified, to the preheader.
         The ican routine Move_Invar( ) to implement this algorithm is shown in Fig­
     ure 13.21. The routine uses the sequence InvarOrder, computed by Mark. Invar ( )
     and four functions as follows:

1.   in s e r t .p reh eader (fe se £ ,n b lo ck s,n in sts, Block) creates a preheader for the loop
     made up of the blocks in bset and inserts it into the flowgraph, if there is not one
     already.
2.   D om .Exits(i>bset) returns tru e if basic block i dominates all exits from the loop
     consisting of the set of basic blocks whose indexes are in bset and f a l s e otherwise.
3. Dom.UsesO', bset tv) returns true if basic block i dominates all uses of variable v in
   the loop consisting of the set of basic blocks whose indexes are in bset and false
     otherwise.
4.   append.preheader (bset, ninsts, Block, inst) appends instruction inst to the end
     of the preheader of the loop consisting of the basic blocks whose indexes are in bset.
     It can be implemented by using append_block( ) in Section 4.8.

          Note that the second proviso includes the case in which a loop may be executed
     zero times because its exit test is performed at the top of the loop and it may be
     true when the loop begins executing. There are two approaches to handling this
     problem; one, called loop inversion, is discussed in Section 18.5. The other simply
     moves the code to the preheader and protects it by a conditional that tests whether
     the loop is entered, i.e., by identifying whether the termination condition is initially
     false. This method is always safe, but it increases code size and may slow it down
     as well, if the test is always true or always false. On the other hand, this approach
     may also enable constant-propagation analysis to determine that the resulting con­
     dition is constant-valued and hence removable (along with the code it guards, if the
     condition is always false).
404           Redundancy Elimination

                 procedure Move_Invar(bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
                    bset: in set of integer
                    nblocks: in integer
                    ninsts: inout array [1*‘nblocks] of integer
                     Inst: inout array [1 “ nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                     Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
                 begin
                     i, blk, pos: integer
                    P: set of (integer x integer)
                    tj: Var
                     inst: MIRInst
                     insert_preheader(bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                     for i := 1 to IlnvarOrderl do
                        blk := (InvarOrderli)@l
                        pos := (Invar0rderli)@2
                        inst := Block[blk][pos]
                        if Has_Left(inst.kind) & (Dom_Exits(blk,bset)
                            & Dom.Uses(blk,bset,inst.left) then
                            II move loop-invariant assignments to preheader
                            case inst.kind of
              binasgn, unasgn: append_preheader(Block[blk][pos],bset)
                               delete_inst(blk,pos,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
              default:      esac
                        elif !Has_Left(inst.kind) then
                            II turn loop-invariant non-assignments to assignments in preheader
                            tj     new_tmp( )
                            case inst.kind of
              binif, bintrap: append.preheader(bset,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,left:tj ,
                                   opr:inst.opr,opdl:inst.opdl,opd2:inst.opd2>)
              unif, untrap: append.preheader(bset,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,left:tj,
                                   opr:inst.opr,opd:inst.opd>)
              default:     esac
                            case inst.kind of
                                I| and replace instructions by uses of result temporary
              binif, unif:     Block[blk][pos] := <kind:valif,opd:<kind:var,val:tj>,
                                   label:inst.lbl>
              bintrap, untrap:
                               Block[blk][pos] := <kind:valtrap,opd:<kind:var,val:tj>,
                                  trapno:inst.trapno)
              default:     esac
                        fi
                     od
                 end      II Move.Invar

 FIG. 13.21 Code to move loop-invariant instructions out of a loop body.

                  As an example of applying M ove.Invar( ), we continue with the example flow-
              graph in Figure 13.18. We call

                  Move.Invar({2,3,4,5,6},2,8,ninsts,Block)
             Section 13.2     Loop-Invariant Code Motion                                          405


             The outermost for loop iterates for i = 1, 2, 3, 4, since
                 InvarOrder = [<3,1 > ,< 3 ,2 > ,< 5 ,2 > ,< 6 ,2>]
             For i = 1, it sets b lk = 3 and pos = 1, and determines that block B3 does dominate
             the loop exit, that Block [3] [1] has a left-hand side, and that
                 D o m _ U se s(3 ,{2 ,3 ,4 ,5 ,6 },a ) = tru e
             so it executes the binasgn case, which appends instruction Block [3] [1] to the
             loop’s preheader, namely, block Bl. For i = 2, the routine behaves similarly, except
             that it chooses the unasgn case (which is the binasgn case also). For i = 3, it sets
             blk = 5 and pos = 2, determines that block B5 does not dominate the loop exit, and
             thus makes no further changes. For i = 4, it sets b lk = 6 and pos = 2, determines
             that block B6 dominates the loop exit, and determines that Block [6] [2] has no left-
             hand side. So it executes the b in if case, which creates a new temporary t l , appends
             t l <r- a < 2 to block Bl, and changes Block [6] [2] to a test of t l . The resulting code
             is shown in Figure 13.22. Note that if we were to do constant folding at this point,
             we would determine that t l is always f a l s e , so the loop is nonterminating.
                  In performing loop-invariant code motion on nested loops, we work from the
             innermost loop outward. This sequence achieves maximal identification of invariants




FIG. 13.22 The result of applying loop-invariant code motion to the flowgraph in Figure 13.18.
406            R ed u n d an cy E lim in atio n


               do i = 1,100                         do i = 1,100
                  m = 2*i + 3*1                        m - 2*i + 3*1
                  do j * 1, i - 1                      do j - 1, i - 1
                     a(i,j) - j + m + 3*k                 a(i,j) = j + m + 3*k
                  enddo                                enddo
               enddo                                enddo
               (a)                                  (b)
               do i = 1,100                         do i = 1,100
                  m = 2*i + 3*1                        m = 2*i + 3*1
                  tl = i - 1                           tl = i - 1
                  t2 = m + 3*k                         t2 = m + 3*k
                  do j = 1, tl                         do j = l,tl
                     a(i,j) = j + t2                      a(i,j) = j + t2
                  enddo                                enddo
               enddo                                enddo
               (c)                                  (d)

               t3 = 3*1
               t4 = 3*k
               do i = 1,100
                  m = 2*i + t3
                  tl = i - 1
                  t2 « m + t4
                  do j = 1, tl
                     a(i,j) = j + t2
                  enddo
               enddo
               (e)
 FIG . 13.23   Loop-invariant code motion on nested Fortran loops (invariants are underlined).

               and code motion. For example, consider the Fortran 77 loop nest in Figure 13.23(a).
               Identifying the loop invariants in the innermost loop results in Figure 13.23(b)—
               the invariants are underlined—and moving them results in Figure 13.23(c). Next,
               identifying the loop invariants in the outer loop results in Figure 13.23(d) and
               moving them produces the final code in Figure 13.23(e).
                    A special case of loop-invariant code motion occurs in loops that perform re­
               ductions. A reduction is an operation such as addition, multiplication, or maximum
               that simply accumulates values, such as in the loop shown in Figure 13.24, where
               the four instructions can be replaced by s = n * a ( j) . If the operand of the reduction
               is loop-invariant, the loop can be replaced with a single operation, as follows:
          1.   If the loop is additive, it can be replaced by a single multiplication.
         2.    If the loop is multiplicative, it can be replaced by a single exponentiation.
         3.    If the loop performs maximum or minimum, it can be replaced by assigning the
               loop-invariant value to the accumulator variable.
         4.    And so on.
            Section 13.3    Partial-Redundancy Elimination                                      407


            s = 0.0
            do i - l,n
               s = s + a(j)
            enddo
FIG. 13.24 An example of a reduction.



13.3        Partial-Redundancy Elimination
            Partial-redundancy elimination is an optimization that combines global common-
            subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code motion and that also makes some
            additional code improvements as well.
                 In essence, a partial redundancy is a computation that is done more than once
            on some path through a flowgraph, i.e., some path through the flowgraph contains
            a point at which the given computation has already been computed and will be
            computed again. Partial-redundancy elimination inserts and deletes computations
            in the flowgraph in such a way that after the transformation each path contains
            no more—and, generally, fewer—occurrences of any such computation than before;
            moving computations out of loops is a subcase. Formulating this as a data-flow
            problem is more complex than any other case we consider.
                 Partial-redundancy elimination originated with the work of Morel and Ren-
            voise [MorR79], who later extended it to an interprocedural form [MorR81]. As
            formulated by them, the intraprocedural version involves performing a bidirectional
            data-flow analysis, but as we shall see, the modern version we discuss here avoids
            this. It is based on a more recent formulation called lazy code motion that was de­
            veloped by Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen [KnoR92]. The use of the word “ lazy” in
            the name of the optimization refers to the placement of computations as late in the
            flowgraph as they can be without sacrificing the reduction in redundant computa­
            tions of the classic algorithm. The laziness is intended to reduce register pressure (see
            Section 16.3.10), i.e., to minimize the range of instructions across which a register
            holds a particular value.
                 To formulate the data-flow analyses for partial-redundancy elimination, we need
            to define a series of local and global data-flow properties of expressions and to show
            how to compute each of them. Note that fetching the value of a variable is a type of
            expression and the same analysis applies to it.
                 A key point in the algorithm is that it can be much more effective if the critical
            edges in the flowgraph have been split before the flow analysis is performed. A
            critical edge is one that connects a node with two or more successors to one with
            two or more predecessors, such as the edge from B1 to B4 in Figure 13.25(a).
            Splitting the edge (introducing the new block Bla) allows redundancy elimination to
            be performed, as shown in Figure 13.25(b). As Dhamdhere and others have shown,
            this graph transformation is essential to getting the greatest impact from partial-
            redundancy elimination.
                 We use the example in Figure 13.26 throughout this section. Note that the
            computation of x * y in B4 is redundant because it is computed in B2 and the one
            in B7 is partially redundant for the same reason. In our example, it is crucial to split
408            Redundancy Elimination




 FIG* 13*25 In (a), the edge from B1 to B4 is a critical edge. In (b), it has been split by the introduction
            of Bla.



               the edge from B3 to B5 so as to have a place to which to move the computation of
               x * y in B7 that is not on a path leading from B2 and that does not precede B6.
                    We begin by identifying and splitting critical edges. In particular, for our exam­
               ple in Figure 13.26, the edges from B2 and B3 to B5 are both critical. For example, for
               the edge from B3 to B5 we have Succ{B3) = {B5, B6} and Pred(B5) = {B2, B3}. Splitting
               the edges requires creating new blocks B2a and B3a and replacing the split edges by
               edges into the new (initially empty) blocks from the tails of the original edges, and
               edges from the new blocks to the heads of the original edges. The resulting flowgraph
               is shown in Figure 13.27.
                    The first property we consider is local transparency.8 An expression’s value is
               locally transparent in basic block i if there are no assignments in the block to
               variables that occur in the expression. We denote the set of expressions that are
               transparent in block i by TRANSloc(i).


               8. Note that local transparency isanalogous to the property we call PRSV in Chapter 8.
             Section 13.3   Partial-Redundancy Elimination                                 409




FIG. 13*26 An example of partially redundant expressions.




            B2




            B4




FIG. 13.27 The example from Figure 13.26 with the edges from B2 to B5 and B3 to B5 split. The
           new blocks B2a and B3a have been added to the flowgraph.
410   R e d u n d an cy E lim in atio n


           For our example,
           TRANSloc( B2) = {x*y}
           TRANSloc(i)           = Uexp = {a+1 ,x*y} for i ^ B2
      where U exp denotes the set of all expressions in the program being analyzed.
          An expression’svalue islocally anticipatable in basic block i ifthere isa compu­
      tation ofthe expression in the block and ifmoving that computation to the beginning
      of the block would leave the effect of the block unchanged, i.e., ifthere are neither
      uses of the expression nor assignments to itsvariables in the block ahead of the com­
      putation under consideration. We denote the set of locally anticipatable expressions
      in block i by ANTloc(i).
          For our example, the values of A N Tloc() are as follows:
           ANTloc(entry)              = 0
           ANTloc(Bl)                 = {a+1}
           ANTloc(B2)                 = {x*y}
           ANTloc(B2a)                = 0
           ANTloc{ B3)                =0
           ANTloc( B3a)               =0
           ANTloc(B4)                 = {x*y}
           ANTloc{ B5)                =0
           ANTloc( B6)                =0
           ANTloc(B7)                 = {x*y}
           ANTloc(ex it)              =0
          An expression’s value isglobally anticipatable on entry to block i ifevery path
      from that point includes a computation of the expression and ifplacing that compu­
      tation at any point on these paths produces the same value. The set of expressions
      anticipatable at the entry to block i is denoted ANTin(i). An expression’s value is
      anticipatable on exit from a block if it is anticipatable on entry to each successor
      block; we use ANTout(i) to denote the set of expressions that are globally anticipat­
      able on exit from block /.To compute A N Tin()and A N Tout()for all blocks i in a
      flowgraph, we solve the following system of data-flow equations:
           ANTin(i) = ANTloc(i) U (TRANSloc(i) D ANTout(i))
           ANTout(i) =           P|       ANTin(j)
                              jeSucc(i)

      with the initialization ANTout(exit) = 0.
          For our example, the values of A N Tin()and A N Tout()are as follows:
           ANTin(e ntry)            = {a+1}      ANTout (entry)   = {a+1}
           ANTin(Bl)                = {a+1}      ANTout( Bl)      = 0
           ANTin( B2)               = {x*y}      ANTout(B2)       = {x*y}
           ANTin( B2a)              = {x*y}      ANTout( B2a)     = {x*y}
           ANTin( B3)               = 0          ANTout( B3)      = 0
Section 13.3    Partial-Redundancy Elimination                                    411

    ANTin( B3a)         = {x*y}       ANTout( B3a)        = {x*y}
    ANTin{ B4)          = lx*y }      ANTout( B4)         = 0
    ANTin( B5)          = lx *y}      ANTout( B5)         = {x*y}
    ANTin( B6)          = 0           ANTout( B6)         = 0
    ANTin( B7)          = {x*y}       ANTout( B7)         = 0
    ANTm(exit)          = 0           ANTout (e xit)      —0
     The next property needed to do lazy code motion is earliestness. An expression
isearliest at the entrance to basic block i ifno block leading from the entry to block
i both evaluates the expression and produces the same value as evaluating it at the
entrance to block i does. The definition of earliestness at the exit from a block is
similar. The properties EARLin() and EARLout() are computed as follows:

    EARLin(i)    =     |J        EARLout(j)
                     jePred(t)

    EARLout(i) = TRANSloc(i) U ^ANTin(i) n EARLin(i)^

where A = Uexp - A, with the initialization EARLin(entry) = Uexp.
   The values of EA RLin{) for our example are as follows:

    EARLin(e ntry)       = {a+l,x*y}          EARLout(e ntry)       = (x*yl
    EARLin( Bl)          = lx*y}              EARLouti Bl)          = (x*yl
    EARLin( B2)          = {x*y}              EARLout( B2)          = (a+1)
    EARLin( B2a)         = la+1}              EARLouti B2a)         = {a+1}
    EARLin( B3)          = lx*y}              EARLouti B3)          = {x*y}
    EARLin( B3a)         = {x*y}              EARLouti B3a)         = 0
    EARLin( B4)          = la+1)              EARLouti B4)          = {a+1}
    EARLin( B5)          = {a+1}              EARLouti B5)          = {a+1}
    EARLin( B6)          = {x*y}              EARLouti B6)          = {x*y}
    EARLin( B7)          = (a+1)              EARLouti B7)          = {a+1}
    EARLin(ex it)        = {a+l,x*y}          EARLout(ex it)        = {a+1,x*y}

    Next we need a property called delayedness. An expression is delayed at the
entrance to block i ifitisanticipatable and earliest at that point and ifall subsequent
computations of itare in block i. The equations for delayedness are

    DELAYoutd) = ANTloc(i) n DELAYin(i)
    DELAYin{i) = ANEAind) U              p|        DELAYoutd)
                                       jePred(i)

where

    ANEAin(i) = ANTin(i) 0 EARLin(i)

with the initialization DELAYin(entry) = ANEAin(entry).
412   R e d u n d an cy E lim in atio n


           The values of ANEAin{) for our example are as follows:
           A N EA m (entry)           = {a+1}
           ANEAin{ B l)               = 0
           ANEAin{ B2)                     = {x*y}
           ANEAin( B2a)               = 0
           ANEAin{ B3)                = 0
           ANEAin{ B3a)               = {x*y}
           ANEAin{ B4)                = 0
           ANEAin(Bb)                 = 0
           ANEAin{ B6)                = 0
           ANEAin{Bl)                 = 0
           A N E A m (exit)           = 0
      and the values of DELAYin() and DELAYout() are as follows:
           DELAYin(entry)                 = {a+1}    DEL AYout (entry)      = {a+1}
           DELAYin{ Bl)                   = {a+1}    DELAYout(Bl)           = 0
           DELAYin( B2)                   = {x*y}    DELAYout( B2)          = 0
           DELAYin( B2a)                  = 0        DELAYout(B2a)          = 0
           DELAYin{ B3)                   = 0        DELAYout( B3)          = 0
           DELAYin( B3a)                  = {x*y}    DELAYout( B3a)         = {x*y}
           DELAYin{ B4)                   = 0        DELAYout( B4)          = 0
           DELAYin( B5)                   = 0        DEL AYout (B5)         = 0
           DELAYin( B6)                   = 0        DELAYout( B6)          = 0
           DELAYin{ B7)                   = 0        DELAYout(B7)           = 0
           DELAYin(ex it)                 = 0        DEL AYout (exit)       = 0
          Next we define a property called latestness. An expression is latest at the en­
      trance to block i ifthat is an optimal point for computing the expression and ifon
      every path from block /’sentrance to the exit block, any optimal computation point
      for the expression occurs after one of the points at which the expression was com­
      puted in the original flowgraph. The data-flow equation for LATEin()isas follows:


           LATEin(i) = DELAYin(i)Pi ANTloc(i) U                 p|        DELAYin(j) ]
                                                              jeSucc(i)

           For our example, LATEin{) isas follows:
           LATEin(e ntry)             = 0
           LATEin(Bl)                = {a+1}
           LATEin( B2)                     = {x*y}
           LATEin( B2a)                   = 0
           LATEin( B3)                    = 0
           LATEin( B3a)              = {x*y}
           LATEin( B4)                = 0
           LATEin(B5)                 = 0
Section 13.3   Partial-Redundancy Elimination                                  413


    LATEin{ B6)          =0
    LATEin{ B7)          =0
    LATEin(ex it)        =0
    A computationally optimal placement for the evaluation of an expression is
defined to be isolated ifand only ifon every path from a successor of the block in
which itiscomputed to the exit block, every original computation of the expression
ispreceded by the optimal placement point. The data-flow properties ISO Lin{) and
ISO Lout() are defined by the equations

    ISOLin(i) = LATEin(i) U (ANTloc(i)flISOLout(i))

    ISOLout(i) =      1^) ISOLin(j)
                   jeSucc(i)

with the initialization ISOLout(exit) = 0.
    For our example, the values of ISO Lin() and ISO Lout{) are as follows:
    ISOLin(entry)       = 0         ISOLout(e n try )      =   0
    ISOLin{ Bl)         = {a+1}     ISOLout (Bl)           =   0
    ISOLin{ B2)         = (x*y)     ISOLout( B2)           =   0
    lSOLin{ B2a)        = 0         ISOLout( B2a)          =   0
    ISOLin{ B3)         = 0         ISOLout( B3)           =   0
    ISOLin( B3a)        = fx*y}     ISOLout( B3a)          =   0
    ISOLin(B4)          = 0         IS O L o u t (BA)      =   0
    lSOLin(B5)          = 0         ISOLout( B5)           =   0
    ISOLin{ B6)         = 0         ISOLout{ B6)           =   0
    ISOLin( B7)         = 0         ISOLout( B7)           =   0
    ISOLin(ex i t )     = 0         ISO Lout(exit)         =   0
     The set of expressions for which a block isthe optimal computation point isthe
set of expressions that are latest but that are not isolated for that block, i.e.,

    OPT(i) = LATEin(i) flISOLout(i)
and the set of redundant computations in a block consists of those that are used in
the block (i.e., in A N Tloc()) and that are neither isolated nor latest in it,i.e.,

    REDN(i) = ANTloc{i)n LATEin(i) U ISOLout(i)
    For our example, the values of OPT() and R E D N () are as follows:
    OPT (entry)       = 0         REDN(e n try )        = 0
    OPT( Bl)          = {a+1}     REDN( Bl)             = {a+1}
    OPT (B2)          = {x*y}     REDN( B2)             = {x*y)
    OPT (B2a)         = 0         REDN( B2a)            = 0
    OPT (B3)          = 0         REDN (B3)             - 0
    OPT (B3a)         = {**y}     REDN (B3a)            - 0
    OPT (B4)          = 0         REDN (B4)             = {x*y}
414          Redundancy Elimination




             62




             B4




 FIG. 13.28 The result of applying modern partial-redundancy elimination to the example in
            Figure 13.27.



                  OPT (B5)       =   0       RED N( B5)        = 0
                  OPT (B6)       =   0       RED N( B6)        = 0
                  OPT(B7)        =   0       RED N (B7)        = {x*y}
                  OPT(ex it)     =   0       RED N (ex it)     - 0


             and so we remove the computations of x * y in B4 and B7, leave the one in B2, and
             add one in B3a, as shown in Figure 13.28.
                 The code required to implement partial-redundancy motion is similar to
             Move_Invar ( ). We leave it as an exercise for the reader.
                 Modern partial-redundancy elimination can be extended to include strength
             reduction. However, the strength reduction is of a particularly weak form, because it
             does not recognize loop constants. For example, the code in Figure 13.29(a) can be
             strength-reduced by the method described in Section 14.1.2 to produce the code in
             Figure 13.29(b), but the approach to strength reduction based on partial-redundancy
             elimination cannot produce this code because it has no notion of loop constants.
                 Briggs and Cooper [BriC94b] improve the effectiveness of partial-redundancy
             elimination by combining it with global reassociation and global value numbering
             (see Section 12.4.2); Cooper and Simpson ([CooS95c] and [Simp96]) improve it
             Section 13.4      Redundancy Elimination and Reassociation                         415

             k = 0                        k = 0
             fo r i = l,n                 fo r i = l,n
                                              1 = 0
                   fo r j = l,n               fo r j = l,n
                       k = k + i*j               i = i + j
                   en d fo r                  en d fo r
                                              k = k + i * 1
             en d fo r                    en d fo r
             (a)                           (b)
FIG. 13.29 An example of the weakness of strength reduction when it is derived from partial-
           redundancy elimination. The h i r code in (a) can be strength-reduced to the code in
           (b) by the algorithm in Section 14.1.2, but not by the method derived from partial-
           redundancy elimination, because it does not recognize i as a loop invariant in the
           inner loop.


             still further by using SSA form to operate on values rather than identifiers. The
             combination with reassociation is discussed briefly in the next section.



13.4         Redundancy Elimination and Reassociation
             Reassociation can significantly enhance the applicability and effectiveness of all
             forms of redundancy elimination. For example, in the Fortran code in Figure 13.30,
             only common-subexpression elimination applies to loop A, resulting in loop B. With
             reassociation included, there is another possible sequence of the optimizations that
             applies, as shown in Figure 13.31.
                  Further, note that one of the sequences requires common-subexpression elimi­
             nation, and the other does not; at least they both end up with the same (best) result.
             This suggests that the combination of the three optimizations should be applied re­
             peatedly, but this may easily lead to a combinatorial explosion, so it is not advised.
                  The combination of partial-redundancy elimination and reassociation alleviates
             this problem somewhat, as shown in Figure 13.32. Note that if we apply partial-
             redundancy elimination first, we still need to apply it again after reassociation to get
             the best result.



             ®      do i = m,n                                                  do i = m,n
                        a = b + i                    CSE                            a = b + i
                        c = a - i                                                   c = a - i
                        d = b + i                                                   d = a
                    enddo                 CSE = common-subexpression            enddo
                                                  elimination
FIG. 13.30 Only common-subexpression elimination applies to the loop in A, producing the one
           in B.
416           Redundancy Elimination



                                       do i = m,n
                                           a = b + i
                                           c = a - i      Reassociation
                                           d = a
                                                                           Loop-invariant
                                       enddo
                                                                           code motion
                                                                     ©   ---------------- ►
              do i = m,n                                                                       c = b
                                                                     do i = m,n
                  a =b + i                                                                     do i = m,n
                                                                         a = b + i
                  c =a - i                                                                         a = b + i
                                                                         c = b
                  d =b + i                                                                         d = a
                                                                         d = a
              enddo                                                                            enddo
                      Reassociation
                                       do i = m,n
                                           a = b + i
                                           c = b
                                           d = b + i
                                       enddo

 FIG. 13.31 Combining common-subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code motion with
            reassociation results in more possible transformation sequences and an improved result,
            compared to Figure 13.30.



                                do i = m,n                             (d ) do i = m,n
                                    a = b + i   Reassociation                   a = b + i
                                    c = a - i   -----------------►              c = b
                                    d = a                                       d = a
                                enddo                                       enddo

               Partial-redundancy                                                       Partial-redundancy
               elimination     /                                                          elimination


                   do i = m,n                                                       E     c = b
                       a = b + i                                                          do i = m,n
                       c = a - i                                                              a = b + i
                       d = b + i                                                              d = a
                   enddo                                                                  enddo



                                                                                  Partial-redundancy
                                                                                  elimination

                                                 enddo

 FIG. 13.32 Combining partial-redundancy elimination with reassociation produces the same result
            as in Figure 13.31.
             Section 13.5    Code Hoisting                                                        417


13.5         Code Hoisting
             Code hoisting (also called unification—see Section 17.6) finds expressions that are
             always evaluated following some point in a program, regardless of the execution
             path, and moves them to the latest point beyond which they would always be
             evaluated. It is a transformation that almost always reduces the space occupied
             by a program but that may affect its execution time positively, negatively, or not
             at all. Whether it improves the execution time or not may depend on its effect on
             instruction scheduling, instruction-cache effects, and several other factors.
                  An expression that is evaluated regardless of the path taken from a given point
             is said to be very busy at that point. To determine very busy expressions, we do
             a backward data-flow analysis on expressions. Define EVAL(i) to be the set of
             expressions that are evaluated in basic block i before any of the operands are
             assigned to (if at all) in the block and KILL(i) to be the set of expressions killed
             by block /. In this context, an expression is killed by a basic block if one (or more)
             of its operands is assigned to in the block, either before it is evaluated or if it is not
             evaluated in the block at all. Then the sets of very busy expressions at the entry to
             and exit from basic block i are VBEin(i) and VBEout(i), respectively, defined by
                 VBEin(i)    = EVAL(i) U (VBEout(i) —K ILL(i))

                 VBEout(i) =      P|       VBEin{j)
                               jeSucc(i)

             where, in solving the data-flow equations, VBEout(i) = 0 initially for all /. The data­
             flow analysis can be implemented efficiently using bit vectors.
                 For example, given the flowgraph in Figure 13.33, the EV A L() and K IL L () sets
             are as follows:




 FIG. 13.33 An example for code hoisting.
418        Redundancy Elimination


               EVAL(e ntry)        = 0                K ILL(e ntry)     = 0
               EVAL( Bl)           = 0                K ILL( Bl)        - 0
               EVAL( B2)           = {c+d}            K ILL( B2)        = {a+d}
               EVAL( B3)           = {a+c,c+d}        K ILL{ B3)        = 0
               EVAL( B4)           = {a+b,a+c}        K ILL( B4)        = 0
               EVAL( B5)           = {a+b,a+d}        K ILL( B5)        = 0
               EV A L(exit)        = 0                K /L L (e x it)   - 0

           and the VBEin{ ) and V BE out{) sets are as follows:

                VBEm(entry)        = {c+d}                        VBEout(e ntry)          {c+d}
                VBEin( Bl)         = {c+d}                        VBEout( Bl)             {c+d}
                VBEin( B2)         = {c+d}                        VBEout( B2)             0
                VBEin( B3)         = {a+b,a+c,c+d}                VEEow£(B3)              {a+b,a+c}
                VBEin{ B4)         = {a+b,a+c}                    VBEow£(B4)              0
                VBEin{ B5)         = {a+b,a+c,a+d,c+d}            VEEow£(B5)              {a+b,a+c,c+d}
                VBEin(ex i t )     =   0                          VBEout(ex i t )         0

                Now, for any i ^ entry, each expression exp in VBEout(i) is a candidate for
           hoisting. Let S be the set of basic blocks j such that block i dominates block /, exp
           is computed in block /, and a computation of exp at the end of block i would reach
           the first computation of exp in block / unimpaired. Let th be a new temporary. Then
           we append th <r- exp to the end of block i (except that if the block ends with a
           conditional, we place the assignment before it) and we replace the first use of exp
           in each block / in S by th. ican code to perform this transformation is given in
           Figure 13.34. The following routines are used in the code:

      1.   Exp_Kind(£) returns the kind of expression contained in a mir instruction of kind
           k (as defined in Section 4.7).
      2.   Reach {exp. B lock, i , j ,k ) returns tru e if a definition of exp at the end of block i
           would reach the kth instruction in block / unimpaired, and f a l s e otherwise.
      3.   append.block O’, n i n s t s , B lo ck , inst) inserts the instruction inst at the end of block
           /, or if the last instruction in block i is a conditional, it inserts it immediately before
           the conditional; in either case, it updates n in s t s [/] accordingly (see Section 4.8).
      4.   Dominate(/,/) returns tru e if block i dominates block /, and f a l s e otherwise.

               Thus, for our example, we hoist the computations of c + d in blocks B2 and B3
           to block Bl, the computations of a + c in B3 and B4 to B3, and the computations of
           a + b in B4 and B5 also to B3, as shown in Figure 13.35. Note that local common-
           subexpression elimination can now replace the redundant computation of a + c in
           B3 by

               t3 <” a + c
               f <- t3
            Section 13.5    Code Hoisting                                          419


            BinExp = Operand x Operator x Operand

            procedure Hoist_Exps(nblocks,ninsts,Block,VBEout)
               nblocks: in integer
               ninsts: inout array [1•-nblocks] of integer
               Block: inout array [1--nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
               VBEout: in integer — > set of Binexp
            begin
               i, j, k: integer
               S: set of (integer x integer)
               exp: BinExp
               th: Var
               s: integer x integer
               inst: MIRInst
               for i :s 1 to nblocks do
                  for each exp e VBEout(i) do
                      S := 0
                      for j := 1 to nblocks do
                         if !Dominate(i,j) then
                            goto LI
                         fi
                         for k := 1 to ninsts[j] do
                            inst := Block[j][k]
                            if Exp_Kind(inst.kind) = binexp
                               & inst.opdl = exp@l & inst.opr = exp@2
                               & inst.opd2 = exp@3 & Reach(exp,Block,i,j,k) then
                               S u= {<j,k»
                               goto LI
                            fi
                         od
            LI:       od
                      th := new_tmp( )
                      append_block(i,ninst s ,Block,<kind:binasgn,
                         left:th,opdl:exp@l,opr:exp@2,opd2:exp@3>)
                      for each s e S do
                         inst := Block[s@l][s@2]
                         case inst.kind of
            binasgn:        Block[s@l][s@2] := <kind:valasgn,
                               left:inst.left,opd:<kind:var,val:th> >
            binif:          Block[s@l][s@2] := <kind:valif,
                               opd:<kind:var,val:th>,lbl:inst.lbl>
            bintrap:        Block[s@l][s@2] := <kind:valtrap,
                               opd:<kind:var,val:th>,trapno:inst.trapno)
                         esac
                      od
                   od
                od
            end     I| Hoist_Exps

FIG. 13.34 An ican routine to perform code hoisting.
420            Redundancy Elimination




 FIG. 13.35 The result of performing code hoisting on the example program in Figure 13.33.


13.6           Wrap-Up
               The optimizations in this chapter have all dealt with elimination of redundant com­
               putations and all require data-flow analysis, either explicitly or implicitly. They can
               all be done effectively on either medium-level or low-level intermediate code.
                    These four optimizations have significant overlap between the first and second
               versus the third one. We summarize them as follows:1

          1.   The first, common-subexpression elimination, finds expressions that are performed
               twice or more often on a path through a procedure and eliminates the occurrences
               after the first one, as long as the values of the arguments have not changed in
               between. It almost always improves performance.
         2.    The second, loop-invariant code motion, finds expressions that produce the same
               result every time a loop is repeated and moves them out of the loop. It almost always
               significantly improves performance because it mostly discovers and moves address
               computations that access array elements.
          3.   The third, partial-redundancy elimination, moves computations that are at least par­
               tially redundant (i.e., that are computed more than once on some path through the
               flowgraph) to their optimal computation points and eliminates totally redundant
               ones. It encompasses common-subexpression elimination, loop-invariant code mo­
               tion, and more.
          4.   The last, code hoisting, finds expressions that are evaluated on all paths leading
               from a given point and unifies them into a single one at that point. It reduces the
               space occupied by a procedure but does not generally improve run-time performance
               unless there are numerous instances for its application.
             Section 13.6    Wrap-Up                                                          421




FIG. 13.36 Place of redundancy-related optimizations (highlighted in bold type) in an aggressive
           optimizing compiler, (continued)


             We presented both the pair of optim izations com m on-subexpression elimination and
             loop-invariant code m otion, and partial-redundancy elimination as well, because
             both approaches have about the sam e efficiency and have similar effects. The m od­
             ern form ulation o f partial-redundancy elimination also provides a fram ework for
             thinking about and form ulating other optim izations that share some o f the d ata­
             flow information it requires. This optim ization can be expected to be used in newly
             written compilers much more frequently in com ing years and is replacing the form er
             combination in some commercial compilers.
                  As shown in Figure 13.36, the redundancy-elimination transform ations are gen­
             erally placed roughly in the middle o f the optim ization process.
422          Redundancy Elimination




 FIG. 13.36 (continued)


13.7         Further Reading
             Partial-redundancy elimination originated with the work of Morel and Renvoise
             [MorR79], who later extended it to an interprocedural form [MorR81]. Extend­
             ing classic partial-redundancy analysis to include strength reduction and induction-
             variable simplifications is discussed in [Chow83].
                 More recently Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen have introduced a form that re­
             quires only unidirectional data-flow analysis [KnoR92]. The edge-splitting trans­
             formation described in Section 13.3 was developed by Dhamdhere [Dham88]. Ex­
             tension of partial-redundancy elimination to include strength reduction is described
             in [KnoR93]. Briggs and Cooper’s improved approach to partial-redundancy elimi­
             nation is described in [BriC94b], and Cooper and Simpson’s further improvements
             are described in [CooS95c] and in [Simp96].


13.8         Exercises
       13.1 As noted in Section 13.1, common-subexpression elimination may not always be
            profitable. Give (a) a list of criteria that guarantee its profitability and (b) a list
            that guarantee that it is unprofitable. (Note that there are intermediate situations
            for which neither can be ensured.)
       Section 13.8    Exercises                                                         423


 13.2 Formulate the data-flow analysis that is the inverse of available expressions, i.e., the
      backward-flow problem in which an expression is in EVAL(i) if it is evaluated in
      block i and none of the variables in it are changed between the entrance to the block
      and the given evaluation, with the path-combining operator being intersection. Is
      there an optimization problem for which this analysis is useful?
 13.3 Give an infinite sequence of programs Pi, ? 2 , . . . and a set of optimizations covered
      in Chapters 12 and 13, such that P„ for each /, derives more benefit from i repetitions
      of the optimizations than it does from i — 1 repetitions.
 13.4 Write an ican routine F w d _ S u b st(n ,n in sts, Block) to perform forward substitu­
      tion on an entire procedure.
 13.5 Explain how you would modify M ark.Invar ( ) and Mark_Block( ) in Figure 13.17
      to deal with reassociation. What effect would this be expected to have on the running
      time of the algorithm?
 13.6 Give an example of a loop nest that makes it clear that doing invariant code motion
      from the innermost loop out is superior to doing it from the outermost loop in.
 13.7 Formulate an algorithm to recognize reductions and to perform loop-invariant code
      motion on them. Use the function Reductor (opr) to determine whether the operator
      opr is an operator useful for performing a reduction.
 13.8 Downward store motion is a variety of code motion that moves stores in a loop to
      the exits of the loop. For example, in the Fortran code in part E of Figure 13.31, the
      variable d is a candidate for downward store motion—each assignment to it except
      the last one is useless, so moving it to follow the loop produces the same result,
      as long as the loop body is executed at least once. Design a method for detecting
      candidates for downward store motion and write ican code to detect and move
      them. What effect does downward store motion have on the need for registers in a
      loop?
 13.9 Write a lis t e x p case for the routine Local_CSE( ) given in Figure 13.2.
13.10 Write a routine Move_Partial_Redun( ) that implements partial-redundancy
      motion.
                                                                              CHAPTER 14



                                       Loop Optimizations




            T
                     he optimizations covered in this chapter either operate on loops or are most
                     effective when applied to loops. They can be done on either medium-level
                     (e.g., m ir ) or low-level (e.g., lir ) intermediate code.
                 They apply directly to the disciplined source-language loop constructs in Fortran
            and Pascal but, for a language like C, require that we define a subclass of loops that
            they apply to. In particular, we define the class of well-behaved loops in C (with
            reference to the code in Figure 14.1) as those in which exp 1 assigns a value to an
            integer-valued variable /, exp2 compares i to a loop constant, exp3 increments or
            decrements i by a loop constant, and stmt contains no assignments to /. A similar
            definition describes the class of well-behaved loops constructed from ifs and gotos
            in any modern programming language.


14.1        Induction-Variable Optimizations
            In their simplest form, induction variables are variables whose successive values form
            an arithmetic progression over some part of a program, usually a loop. Usually the
            loop’s iterations are counted by an integer-valued variable that proceeds upward (or
            downward) by a constant amount with each iteration. Often, additional variables,
            most notably subscript values and so the addresses of array elements, follow a pat­
            tern similar to the loop-control variable’s, although perhaps with different starting
            values, increments, and directions.
                 For example, the Fortran 77 loop in Figure 14.2(a) is counted by the variable i,
            which has the initial value 1, increments by 1 with each repetition of the loop body,


            for (exp 1 ;expl; exp3)
               stmt
 FIG, 14.1 Form of a fo r loop in C.

                                                                                             425
426           Loop Optimizations


                                                 integer a(100)
              integer a(100)                     tl = 202
              do i = 1,100                       do i « 1,100
                 a(i) = 202 - 2 * i                 tl * tl - 2
              enddo                                 a(i) = tl
                                                 enddo
              (a)                                (b)
  FIG. 14.2 An example of induction variables in Fortran 77. The value assigned to a ( i) in (a)
            decreases by 2 in each iteration of the loop. It can be replaced by the variable t l , as
            shown in (b), replacing a multiplication by an addition in the process.

              and finishes with the value 100. Correspondingly, the expression assigned to a ( i )
              has the initial value 200, decreases by 2 each time through the loop body, and has
              the final value 2. The address of a ( i ) has the initial value (in m ir ) addr a, increases
              by 4 with each loop iteration, and has the final value (addr a) + 396. At least one
              of these three progressions is unnecessary. In particular, if we substitute a temporary
              t l for the value of 202 - 2 * i, we can transform the loop to the form shown in
              Figure 14.2(b), or to its equivalent in m ir , shown in Figure 14.3(a). This is an
              example of an induction-variable optimization called strength reduction: it replaces
              a multiplication (and a subtraction) by a subtraction alone (see Section 14.1.2). Now
              i is used only to count the iterations, and
                    addr a ( i ) = (addr a) + 4 * i - 4
              so we can replace the loop counter i by a temporary whose initial value is addr a,
              counts up by 4s, and has a final value of (addr a) + 396. The mir form of the result
              is shown in Figure 14.3(b).
                   All of the induction-variable optimizations described here are improved in effec­
              tiveness by being preceded by constant propagation.
                   An issue to keep in mind in performing induction-variable optimizations is that
              some architectures provide a base + index addressing mode in which the index may
              be scaled by a factor of 2, 4, or 8 before it is added to the base (e.g., pa-risc
              and the Intel 386 architecture) and some provide a “ modify” mode in which the
              sum of the base and the index may be stored into the base register either before or
              after the storage reference (e.g., pa-risc , power, and the VAX). The availability of
              such instructions may bias removal of induction variables because, given a choice
              of which of two induction variables to eliminate, one may be susceptible to scaling
              or base register modification and the other may not. Also, pa-risc ’s add and branch
              instructions and power ’s decrement and branch conditional instructions may bias
              linear-function test replacement (see Figure 14.4 and Section 14.1.4) for similar
              reasons.

14.1.1        Identifying Induction Variables
              Induction variables are often divided, for purposes of identification, into basic or
              fundamental induction variables, which are explicitly modified by the same con­
              stant amount during each iteration of a loop, and dependent induction variables,
            Section 14.1      Induction-Variable Optimizations                                   427

                  tl <- 202                            tl <- 202
                  i «s- :L                             t3 «- addr a
                                                       t4 <- t3 - 4
                                                       t5 <- 4
                                                       t6 <- t4
                                                       t7 <- t3 + 396
            LI: t2 <- i > 100                      LI: t2 <- t6 > t7
                if t2 goto L2                          if t2 goto L2
                tl <- tl - 2                           tl <- tl - 2
                t3 <- addr a
                t4 <- t3 - 4
                t5 <- 4 * :  i
                t6 <- t4 + t5                            t6 <- t4 + t5
                *t6 <-- tl                               *t6 <- tl
                i «e- ]L + 1                             t5 <- t5 + 4
                goto LI                                  goto LI
            L2:                                    L2:
            (a)                                    (b)
FIG. 14.3   In (a), the mir form of the loop in Figure 14.2(b) and, in (b), the same code with
            induction variable i eliminated, the loop-invariant assignments t3 <- addr a and
            t4 <- t3 - 4 removed from the loop, strength reduction performed on t5 , and induction
            variable i removed.

                tl <- 202
                t3 <- addr a
                t4 <-- 396
                t5    t3 + 396
                t2 <- t4 > 0
                if t2 goto L2
            LI: tl <- tl - 2
                t6 <- t4 + t5
                *t6 <- tl
                t4 <- t4 + 4
                t2 <- t4 <= 0
                if t2 goto LI
            L2:

FIG. 14.4 The result of biasing the value of t4 in the code in Figure 14.3(b) so that a test against 0
          can be used for termination of the loop. Loop inversion (see Section 18.5) has also been
          performed.

            which may be modified or computed in more complex ways. Thus, for example, in
            Figure 14.2(a), i is a basic induction variable, while the value of the expression
            200 - 2 * i and the address of a ( i ) are dependent induction variables. By contrast,
            in the expanded and transformed m ir version of this code in Figure 14.3(b), the in­
            duction variable i has been eliminated and t5 has been strength-reduced. Both t l
            and t5 (which contain the value of 200 - 2 * i and the offset of the address of a ( i )
            from the address of a ( 0 ) , respectively) are now basic induction variables.
428           Loop Optimizations


                                              tl <-- 4
                  i <- 0                      i <- 0
              LI: . . .                   LI: . . .
                  use of i                    use of i
                  i <- i + 2                  tl <- tl + 6
                  use of i                    use of tl
                  i <- i + 4                  i <- i + 6
                  use of i                    use of i
                  goto LI                     goto LI
              (a)                         (b)
  FIG* 14*5 Example of splitting a basic induction variable with two modifications (a) into two
            induction variables (b).

                   To identify induction variables, we initially consider all variables in a loop
             as candidates, and we associate with each induction variable j we find (including
             temporaries) a linear equation of the form j = b * biv + c, which relates the values
             of j and biv within the loop, where biv is a basic induction variable and b and
             c are constants (they may either be actual constants or previously identified loop
             invariants); biv9 b, and c are all initially n il. Induction variables with the same
             basic induction variable in their linear equations are said to form a class and the
             basic induction variable is called its basis. As we identify a variable / as potentially
             an induction variable, we fill in its linear equation.
                  The identification can be done by sequentially inspecting the instructions in the
             body of a loop, or it can be formulated as a data-flow analysis. We follow the
             first approach. First, we identify basic induction variables by looking for variables i
             whose only modifications in the loop are of the form i            i + d or i <- d + /, where d
             is a (positive or negative) loop constant. For such a variable /, the linear equation is
             simply / = 1 * i + 0, and i forms the basis for a class of induction variables. If there
             are two or more such modifications of i in the loop, we split the basic induction
             variable into several, one for each modification. For example, given the code in
             Figure 14.5(a), we split i into the two induction variables i and t l , as shown in
             Figure 14.5(b). In general, given a basic induction variable with two modifications,
             as shown in Figure 14.6(a), the transformed code is as shown in Figure 14.6(b);
             generalization to three or more modifications is straightforward.
                  Next, we repetitively inspect the instructions in the body of the loop for variables
             / that occur on the left-hand side of an assignment, such that the assignment has
             any of the forms shown in Table 14.1, where i is an induction variable (basic or
             dependent) and e is a loop constant. If i is a basic induction variable, then / is in
             the class of i and its linear equation can be derived from the form of the assignment
             defining it; e.g., for / <- e * /, the linear equation for / is / = e * i + 0. If i is not basic,
             then it belongs to the class of some basic induction variable i\ with linear equation
             i = b\ * i\ + c\\ then / also belongs to the class of i\ and its linear equation (again
             supposing that the defining assignment is j <- e * i) is / = (e * b\) * i\ + e * c\. Two
             further requirements apply to a dependent induction variable /. First, there must
             be no assignment to i\ between the assignment to i and the assignment to / in the
             loop, for this would alter the relationship between / and /*i, possibly making / not an
              Section 14.1          Induction-Variable Optimizations                              429

                                                           1 1 <— io - Cl2
                    1 <r~ i Q                              i <- io
                                                    L I:   . . .
                    use of i                               use of i

                    i      i + a\                          t\      tl +       + Cl2)

                    use of i                               use of t l

                    i      i + #2                          i < - i + (a \ + a i )

                    use of i                               use of i

                    goto LI                                goto LI
              (a)                                   (b)
  FIG* 14.6 Template for splitting a basic induction variable with two modifications (a) into two
              induction variables (b).

TABLE 14.1 Assignment types that may
             generate dependent
             induction variables.

             / <- i * e
             j <- e * i
             j      i+ e
             j <- e+i
             j <- i- e
             j <- e -i
             j <- ~i



             induction variable at all; second, there must be no definition of i from outside the
             loop that reaches the definition of /. Reaching definitions or ud-chains can be used
             to check the latter condition.
                 If there is more than one assignment to /, but all of them are of one of these
             forms, then we split / into several induction variables, one for each such assignment,
             each with its own linear equation.
                 Assignments of the form
                    j <r- i / e
             can be accommodated also if we first unroll the loop body by a factor f that is a
             multiple of e (see Section 17.4.3). Then the linear equation for / is / = (f /e) * i + 0,
             assuming that i is a basic induction variable.
                  If we ever need to fill in a different basic induction variable, b value, or c value
             in the linear equation for a variable / for which they are already set, we split the
             induction variable into two, as described above.
430             Loop Optimizations

                  IVrecord: record {tiv,biv: Var,
                                    blk,pos: integer,
                                    fctr,diff: Const}
                  IVs: set of IVrecord

                  procedure Find.IVs(bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                     bset: in set of integer
                     nblocks: in integer
                     ninsts: in array [1**nblocks] of integer
                     Block: in array [1 ••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                  begin
                     inst: MIRInst
                     i , j : integer
                     var: Var
                     change: boolean
                     opsl, ops2: enum {opdl,opd2}
                     iv: IVrecord
                     IVs := 0
                     for each i e bset do
                         for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                             inst := Block[i][j]
                             case inst.kind of
                                I| search for instructions that compute fundamental induction
                                I| variables and accumulate information about them in IVs
                binasgn:        if IV_Pattern(inst,opdl,opd2,bset,nblocks,Block)
                                   V IV_Pattern(inst,opd2,opdl,bset,nblocks,Block) then
                                   IVs u= {<tiv:inst.left,blk:i,pos:j,fctr:l,
                                      biv:inst.left,diff:0 »
                                fi
                default:     esac
                         od
                     od

  F IG . 14.7   Code to identify induction variables.




                     If a m od ification o f a p oten tial in duction variab le occu rs in one arm o f a con d i­
                tion al, there m u st be a b alan cin g m odification in the other arm .
                     T h e routine F in d _ IV s ( ) in Figure 1 4 .7 an d the au x iliary routines in Figure 14.8
                im plem ent m o st o f the ab ove. T hey om it induction variab les with m ore than one
                assign m en t in the lo o p an d the requirem ent th at an in duction-variable definition in
                one arm o f a con d ition al m u st be balan ced by such a definition in the other arm .
                T hey use several fu n ction s, a s follow s:


          1.    L o o p . C o n s t ( o p t t d , n b l o c k s , B lo c k ) returns t r u e if op eran d opnd is a con ­
                stan t or if it is a v ariab le th at is a lo o p con stan t in the lo o p con sistin g o f the set o f
                block s bset, an d f a l s e otherw ise.
            Section 14.1            Induction-Variable Optimizations                                                                          431


                    repeat
                       change := false
                       for each i e bset do
                           for j :s 1 to ninsts[i] do
                              inst := Block[i] [j]
                              case inst.kind of
                                 I| check for dependent induction variables
                                 I| and accumulate information in the IVs structure
            binasgn:                      change := Mul_IV(i,j,opdl,opd2,
                                             bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                                          change V= Mul_IV(i,j,opd2,opdl,
                                             bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                                          change V= Add_IV(i,j,opdl,opd2,
                                             bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block)
                                          change V= Add_IV(i,j,opd2,opdl,
                                             bset,ninsts,Block)

            default:                 esac
                               od
                      od
                   until !change
               end     I I Find_IVs

             procedure IV_Pattern(inst,ops1,ops2,bset,nblocks,Block)
                returns boolean
                inst: in Instruction
                opsl,ops2: in enum {opdl,opd2}
                bset: in set of integer
                nblocks: in integer
                Block: in array [1••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
             begin
                 return inst.left = inst.ops1 .val & inst.opr = add
                    & Loop_Const(inst.ops2,bset,nblocks,Block)
                    & !3iv e IVs (iv.tiv = inst.left)
             end     || IV_Pattern

FIG. 14.7   (continued)


       2.   A s s i g n _ B e t w e e n ( i / < z r , / , / , £ , / , f e s e £ , n b l o c k s , B l o c k ) re tu rn s t r u e if v a r ia b le var
            is a s s ig n e d to o n s o m e p a th b e tw e e n in str u c tio n B l o c k [/] [/]                        a n d in str u c tio n
            B l o c k [ £ ] [ / ] , a n d f a l s e o th e rw ise .

       3.   N o_R each_D ef s                                 n b l o c k s , B l o c k ) re tu r n s t r u e if th ere a re n o in s tr u c ­
            tio n s o u ts id e th e lo o p th a t d e fin e v a r ia b le var a n d re a c h in str u c tio n B l o c k [/] [ / ] ,
            a n d o th e rw ise f a l s e .

            They also use the set IVs of IVrecords that records induction variables, their linear
            equations, and the block and position of the statement in which they are defined.
            The record
                   <t i v i v a r l ,blk:/,pos:/,f ctr :c l , b i v : v a r ,d if f :c 2 )
432               Loop O ptim izations

                   procedure Mul_IV(i,j,opsl,ops2,bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block) returns boolean
                       i, j: in integer
                       opsl, ops2: in enum {opdl,opd2}
                      bset: in set of integer
                      nblocks: in integer
                      ninsts: in array [1**nblocks] of integer
                      Block: in array [1 •-nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                   begin
                       inst :* Block[i][j]: MIRInst
                       ivl, iv2: IVrecord
                       if Loop_Const(inst.opsl,bset,nblocks,Block)
                          & inst.opr = mul then
                          if 3ivl e IV s (inst.ops2.val = ivl.tiv
                              & ivl.tiv = ivl.biv & ivl.fctr = 1
                              & ivl.diff = 0) then
                              IVs u= {<tiv:inst.left,blk:i,pos:j,
                                 fctr:inst.opsl.val,biv:ivl.biv,diff:0>>
                          elif 3iv2 e IVs (inst.ops2.val = iv2.tiv) then
                              if !Assign_Between(iv2.biv,i,j,iv2.blk,iv2.pos,
                                 bset,nblocks,Block)
                                 & No_Reach_Defs(inst.ops2.val,i,j,bset,
                                 nblocks,Block) then
                                 IVs u= {<tiv:inst.left,blk:i,pos:j ,
                                    fctr:inst.opsl.val*iv2.fctr,biv:iv2.biv,
                                    diff:inst.opsl.val*iv2.diff»
                              fi
                          fi
                          return true
                       fi
                       return false
                   end      || Mul.IV

  F IG . 1 4 .8   A uxiliary routines used in identifying induction variables.



                  d e c la re d in F ig u re 1 4 .7 d e scrib e s an in d u ctio n v a ria b le varl defined in in stru ction
                  B l o c k [/] [ / ] , in the c la ss o f b a sic in d u ctio n v a ria b le var , a n d w ith the lin ear eq u atio n

                       varl = cl * var + c l

                       N o te th a t e x p re ssio n s th a t are co n sta n t-v a lu e d w ith in a lo o p , such a s

                        i n s t . o p d l. v a l* i v 2 . f c t r



                        iv 2 . d i f f + i n s t . o p d l. v a l

                  m ay n o t h av e th eir v a lu e s k n o w n a t c o m p ile tim e— they m ay sim p ly be lo o p co n ­
                  sta n ts. In th is situ a tio n , w e n eed to c a rry the lo o p -c o n sta n t e x p re ssio n s in the
                  I V r e c o r d s a n d g en era te in stru c tio n s to c o m p u te their v a lu es in the lo o p ’s preheader.
           Section 14.1         Induction-Variable Optimizations                                           433

            procedure Add_IV(i,j,opsl,ops2,bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block) returns boolean
                i, j: in integer
                opsl, ops2: in enum {opdl,opd2>
               bset: in set of integer
               nblocks: in integer
               ninsts: in array [••] of integer
               Block: in array [••] of array [••] of MIRInst
            begin
                inst := Block[i][j]: in MIRInst
                ivl, iv2: IVrecord
                if Loop_Const(inst.opsl,bset,nblocks,Block)
                   & inst.opr = add then
                   if 3ivl e iVs (inst.ops2.val = ivl.tiv
                      & ivl.tiv = ivl.biv & ivl.fctr = 1
                      & ivl.diff * 0) then
                      IVs u= {<tiv:inst.left,blk:i,pos:j,
                         fctr:1,biv:ivl.biv,diff:inst.opsl.val>}
                   elif 3iv2 e IVs (inst.ops2.val = iv.tiv) then
                      if !Assign.Between(iv2.biv,i,j,iv2.blk,iv2.pos,
                         bset,nblocks,Block)
                         & No_Reach_Defs(inst.ops2.val,i,j,bset,
                         nblocks,Block) then
                         IVs u= {<tiv:inst.left,blk:i,pos:j,
                            fctr:iv2.fctr,biv:iv2.biv,
                            diff:iv2.diff+inst.opsl.val»
                      fi
                   fi
                   return true
               fi
               return false
            end     || Add.IV

FIG. 14.8 (continued)


                 As a small example of this method for identifying induction variables, con­
           sider the m i r code in Figure 14.3(a). The first basic induction variable we encounter
           is t l , whose only assignment in the loop is t l <r- t l - 2; its linear equation is
           t l = l * t l + 0. The only other basic induction variable is i with a linear equa­
           tion i = 1 * i + 0. Next, we find that t5 is a dependent induction variable with a
           linear equation t 5 = 4 * i + 0. Finally, we identify t 6 as another dependent induc­
           tion variable (since addr a, the value of t 3 , is a loop constant) in the class of i with
           linear equation t 6 = 4 * i + addr a.
                 As another example of the process of identifying induction variables, consider
           the m i r code in Figure 14.9. We begin with the inner loop consisting of blocks B4
           and B5. The only basic induction variable in the loop is k, so IVs (which is initially
           empty) becomes

               IVs - { < t i v : k , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 1 7 , f c t r : l , b i v : k , d i f f : 0 »
434           Loop Optimizations




  FIG. 14.9 A second example for induction-variable identification.

              Next t l 2 is recognizable as an induction variable in the class of k, so I Vs becomes
                  IVs = { < t i v :k ,b l k :B 5 ,p o s :1 7 ,f c t r :1 , b i v : k , d i f f :0 > ,
                          < t i v :t l 2 ,b l k :B 5 ,p o s :1 1 , f c t r : 1 0 0 ,b i v :k ,d i f f :0 > }
              Then t l 3 is recognized as an induction variable in the class of k, so we have
                  IVs = {<tiv:k, blk:B5,pos:17,fctr:1, biv:k,diff:0>,
                         <tiv:tl2,blk:B5,pos:ll,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:0),
                         <tiv:tl3,blk:B5,pos: 12, fctr:100,biv:k,dif f :j »
              Temporaries t l 4 , t l 5 , and t l 6 are also recognized as induction variables in the class
              of k, so we finally have
         Section 14.1           Induction-Variable Optimizations                                         435

              IVs = {<tiv:k, blk:B5,pos:17,fctr:1, biv:k,diff:0>,
                     <tiv:tl2,blk:B5,pos:ll,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:0>,
                     <tiv:tl3,blk:B5,pos:12,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:j > ,
                     <tiv:tl4,blk:B5,pos:13,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:j—101>,
                     <t iv:115,blk:B5,pos:14,fctr:400,biv:k ,dif f :4*j-404),
                     <tiv:116,blk:B5,pos:15,fctr:400,biv:k ,
                          diff:(addr a)+4*j-404)}
              Note that t2, t3, t4, t5, t6, t7, t9, and til are all loop invariants in the
         inner loop, but that does not concern us here, because none of them, except til,
         contribute to defining any of the induction variables.
              Now, in the outer loop, consisting of blocks B2, B3, B4, B5, and B6, variable 1 is
         the first induction variable identified, setting
              IVs = {<tiv:l,blk:B6,pos:l,fctr:l,biv:l,diff:0»
         and i is discovered next, resulting in
              IVs = {<tiv:l,blk:B6,pos:l,fctr:l,biv:l,diff:0>,
                     <tiv:i,blk:B6,pos:2,fctr:l,biv:i,diff:0>>
         Then tl in B3 is added, yielding
              IVs = {<tiv:l, blk:B6,pos:1,fctr:1,biv:l,diff:0>,
                     <tiv:i, blk:B6,pos:2,fctr:1,biv:i,diff:0>,
                     <tiv:tl,blk:B3,pos:l,fctr:3,biv:i,diff:0>}
             Now, notice that j is an induction variable also. However, this fact is unlikely
         to be discovered by most compilers. It requires algebra or symbolic arithmetic to
         determine the following: on exit from block Bl, we have 1 + i = 101, and B6, the
         only block that modifies either 1 or i, maintains this relationship, thus
              j = tl + 1 = 3*i + 1 = 2*i + (i + 1) = 2*i + 101
         This is unfortunate, because several of the loop invariants in the inner loop (men­
         tioned above) have values that would also be induction variables in the outer loop if
         j were recognizable as one.
              Once we have identified induction variables, there are three important trans­
         formations that apply to them: strength reduction, induction-variable removal, and
         linear-function test replacement.

14.1.2   Strength Reduction
         Strength reduction replaces expensive operations, such as multiplications and divi­
         sions, by less expensive ones, such as additions and subtractions. It is a special case
         of the method o f finite differences applied to computer programs. For example, the
         sequence
              0 ,3 ,6 , 9 , 1 2 , . . .
         has first differences (i.e., differences between successive elements) that consist of all
         3s. Thus, it can be written as s* = 3 * i for / = 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . or as s/+ \ = s* + 3 with sq = 0.
436        Loop Optimizations


           The second form is the strength-reduced version—instead of doing multiplications,
           we do additions. Similarly, the sequence

               0 ,1 ,4 , 9 , 1 6 , 2 5 , . . .

           has first differences

               1 ,3 ,5 , 7, 9 , . . .

           and second differences that consist of all 2s. It can be written as s, = i1 for
           i = 0 ,1 , 2, 3 , . . . , or as s,+\ = s, + 2 * / + 1 for so = 0, or as s,-+\ = s, + ti where
           £/+l = ti + 2, so = 0, and t$ = \. Here, after two finite differencing operations, we
           have reduced computing a sequence of squares to two additions for each square.
           Strength reduction is not limited to replacing multiplication by additions and re­
           placing addition by increment operations. Allen and Cocke [A11C81] discuss a series
           of applications for it, such as replacing exponentiation by multiplications, division
           and modulo by subtractions, and continuous differentiable functions by quadratic
           interpolations. Nevertheless, we restrict ourselves to discussing only simple strength
           reductions, because they are by far the most frequently occurring ones and, as a
           result, the ones that typically provide the greatest benefit. Methods for handling
           the other cases are broadly similar and can be found in the references given in Sec­
           tion 14.4.
                To perform strength reduction on the induction variables identified in a loop,
           we work on each class of induction variables in turn.

      1.   Let i be a basic induction variable, and let / be in the class of i with linear equation
           / = b * i + c.
      2.   Allocate a new temporary tj and replace the single assignment to / in the loop by
           / <“ tj.
      3.   After each assignment i <r- i + d to i in the loop, insert the assignment tj tj + db,
           where db is the value of the constant-valued expression d * b (if this value is not
           actually constant, but only a loop constant, allocate a new temporary db and put
           the assignment db <- d * b in the preheader of the loop).
      4.   Put the pair of assignments
               tj <r- b * i
               tj <r- tj + c
           at the end of the preheader to ensure that tj is properly initialized.
      5.   Replace each use of j in the loop by tj.
      6.   Finally, add tj to the class of induction variables based on i with linear equation
           tj = b * i + c.

               The routine Stren gth .R ed uce( ) in Figure 14.10 implements this algorithm.
           The array SRdone has SRdone [/] [/] = tru e if strength reduction has been performed
           on instruction / in block /, and f a l s e otherwise. Strength_Reduce ( ) uses two
           functions, as follows:
             Section 14.1         Induction-Variable Optimizations                                                          437


             procedure Strength.Reduce(bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block,IVs,SRdone)
                bset: in set of integer
                nblocks: in integer
                ninsts: inout array [1••nblocks] of integer
                Block: inout array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                IVs: inout set of IVrecord
                SRdone: out array [l**nblocks] of [••] of boolean
             begin
                i, j : integer
                tj, db: Var
                iv, ivl, iv2: IVrecord
                inst: MIRInst
                for each i e bset do
                   for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                       SRdone[i][j] := false
                   od
                od
                I| search for uses of induction variables
                for each ivl e IVs (ivl.fctr = 1 & ivl.diff = 0) do
                   for each iv2 e IVs (iv2.biv = ivl.biv
                      & iv2.tiv * iv2.biv) do
                      tj := new_tmp( ); db := new_tmp( )
                       i := iv2.blk; j     iv2.pos
                       SRdone[i][j] := true
                       I| and split their computation between preheader and
                       I| this use, replacing operations by less expensive ones
                       append.preheader(bset,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,
                          left:db,opr:mul,opdl:<kind:const,val:ivl.diff >,
                          opd2:<kind:const,val:iv2.fctr>>)
                       append_preheader(bset,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,
                          left:tj,opr:mul,opdl:<kind:const,val:iv2.fctr>,
                          opd2:<kind:var,val:iv2.biv> >)
                       append_preheader(bset,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,
                          left:tj,opr:add,opdl:<kind:var,val:tj >,
                          opd2:<kind:const,val:iv2.diff >>)
                       insert_after(i,j ,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,left:tj,opr:add,
                          opdl:<kind:var,val:tj >,opd2:<kind:var,val:db> >)

                                                                                                                  (continued)

FIG, 14.10 Code to strength-reduce induction variables.

        1.   i n s e r t . a f t e r ( / , / , n i n s t s , B l o c k , in st) inserts instruction in st into B l o c k [/] after
             the /th instruction and updates the program-representation data structures to reflect
             its having done so (see Figure 4.14).
        2.   ap p en d _p reh ead er(& se£,n in sts,B lo ck, in st) inserts instruction in st at the end of
             Block [i], where block i is the preheader of the loop made up of the blocks in b se t ,
             and updates the program-representation data structures to reflect its having done so.
                 For our m i r example in Figure 14.3(a), which we reproduce here as Figure
             14.11(a), we first consider induction variable t5 with linear equation t5 = 4 * i + 0.
438           L oop O ptim izations


                            IVs u= {<tiv:tj,blk:i,pos:j+1,fctr:iv2.fctr*ivl.fctr,biv:iv2.biv,
                               diff:iv2.diff>>
                            for each i e bset do
                               if ivl.tiv = iv2.tiv then
                                  for each iv e IVs do
                                     IVs := (IVs - {iv}) u {<tiv:iv.tiv,
                                        blk:iv.blk,pos:iv.pos,fctr:iv.fctr,
                                        biv:tj,diff:iv.diff>}
                                  od
                               fi
                               for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                                  inst := Block[i][j]
                                  case Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
              binexp:                if inst.opdl.val - iv2.tiv then
                                        Block[i][j].opdl := <kind:var,val:tj>
                                     fi
                                     if inst.opd2.val = iv2.tiv then
                                        Block[i][j].opd2 := <kind:var,val:tj>
                                     fi
              unexp:                 if inst.opd.val - iv2.tiv then
                                        Block[i][j].opd := <kind:var,val:tj>
                                     fi

              listexp:                   for j :s 1 to linst.argsl do
                                            if inst.argsii@l.val = iv2.tiv then
                                               Block[i][j].argsli@l := <kind:var,val:tj>
              noexp:                  esac
                                 od
                            od
                       od
                 od
              end       II Strength_Reduce

 FIG. 14.10   (continued)


              We allocate a new temporary t7 and replace the assignment to t5 by t5              t7 . We
              insert t 7    t7 + 4 after i <r- i + 1, and t 7 <r- 4 in the preheader. Finally, we create
              the linear equation t7 = 4 * i + 0 for the induction variable t7 in the class of i , and
              we put the resulting record into IVs. This results in the code in Figure 14.11(b).
              Performing the same transformation on t6 with linear equation t6 = 4 * i + t4
              and removing the loop invariants t 3 and t 4 from the loop results in the code in
              Figure 14.12. Note that these transformations have increased the size of the code—
              there are now 11 instructions in the loop, rather than the 9 we started with. Our
              next task, induction-variable removal, shows how to regain and often improve the
              code size.
                   For the second example in the preceding section, Figure 14.9, we show the inner
              loop with its preheader in Figure 14.13. The set of induction-variable records for it
              (as computed in the preceding section, but with the positions renumbered to reflect
              removal of the loop invariants) is as follows:
             Section 14.1      Induction-Variable Optimizations                                    439

                   tl <- 202                             tl <- 202
                   i <- 1                                i <- 1
                                                         t7 <- 4
             LI: t2 <- i > 100                       LI: t2 <- i > 100
                 if t2 goto L2                           if t2 goto L2
                 tl <- tl - 2                            tl <- tl - 2
                 t3 <- addr a                            t3 <- addr a
                 t4 <- t3 - 4                            t4 <- t3 - 4
                 t5 <- 4 * i                             t5 <- t7
                 t6 <- t4 + t5                           t6 <- t4 + t5
                 *t6 <- tl                               *t6 <- tl
                 i <- i + 1                              i <- i + 1
                                                         t7 <- t7 + 4
                   goto LI                               goto LI
             L2:                                     L2:
             (a)                                     (b)
FIG. 14.11   In (a), the mir form of the loop in Figure 14.3(a) and, in (b), the same code with strength
             reduction performed on the induction variable t5 .



                 tl <- 202
                 i <- 1
                 t7 <- 4
                 t3 <- addr a
                 t4 <- t3- 4
                 t8 <- t4+ t7
             LI: t2 <- i > 100
                 if t2 goto L2
                 tl <- tl- 2
                 t5 <- t7
                 t6 <- t8
                 *t6 <- tl
                 i <- i + 1
                 t8 <- t8+ 4
                 t7 <- t7+ 4
                 goto LI
             L2:

FIG. 14.12   The result of removing the loop invariants t3 and t4 and strength-reducing t6 in the
             code in Figure 14.11(b).



                   IVs = {<tiv:k, blk:B5,pos:9,fctr:1, biv:k,diff:0>,
                          <tiv:tl2,blk:B5,pos:3,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:0>,
                          <tiv:tl3,blk:B5,pos:4,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:j>,
                          <tiv:tl4,blk:B5,pos:5,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:j-101>,
                          <tiv:tl5,blk:B5,pos:6,fctr:400,biv:k,diff:4*j-404>,
                          <tiv:1 16,blk:B 5 ,pos:7,f ctr:400,biv:k ,
                              diff:(addr a)+4*j-404)}
440           L o o p O p tim ization s




 FIG. 14.13   The result of removing loop invariants from the inner loop of our second example,
              Figure 14.9, and deleting the outer loop, except B3, which is the preheader of the
              inner loop.


                   The algorithm initially sets

                   ivl = <tiv:k, blk:B5,pos:9,fctr:1, biv:k,diff:0>
                   iv2 = <tiv:tl2,blk:B5,pos:3,fctr:100,biv:k,diff:0>

              allocates temporaries t l 7 and t l 8 as the values of t j and db, respectively, sets
              i = B5, j = 3 , and SRdone [B5] [3] = true. Next, it appends to the preheader (block
              B3) the instructions
                   tl8    <- 100 * 1
                   tl7    <- 100 * k
                   tl7    <- t l 7 + 0
              appends to block B5 the instruction
                   tl7       tl7 + tl8
              and sets
                   IVs = { < t i v :k , b lk :B 5,p os:9, f c t r : l , b i v : k ,d i f f :0 > ,
                           < t i v :t l2 ,b lk :B 5 ,p o s :3 , f c t r : 1 0 0 ,b iv :k ,d iff:0 > ,
             Section 14.1         Induction-Variable O ptim izations                                                             441




FIG. 14.14 The result of strength-reducing t l 2 on the code in Figure 14.13.



                              < t i v :t l 3 ,b l k :B 5 ,p o s :4 , f c t r : 1 0 0 , b i v : k , d i f f : j > ,
                              < t i v :t l 4 ,b l k :B 5 ,p o s :5 , f c t r : 1 0 0 , b i v : k , d i f f : j-T 0 1 > ,
                              < t i v : 1 1 5 ,b l k : B 5 , p o s :6 , f c t r :4 0 0 ,b i v : k , d i f f : 4 * j - 4 0 4 ),
                              < t i v : 1 1 6 ,b l k : B 5 , p o s : 7 , f c t r : 4 0 0 , b i v : k ,
                                     d i f f : (addr a ) + 4 *j -4 0 4 ),
                              < t i v : t l 7 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 1 0 ,f c t r :1 0 0 ,b i v : k , d i f f : 100>>

             Finally, the routine replaces all uses of t l 2 by t l 7 . Note that two of the instruc­
             tions inserted into the preheader (namely, t l 8 <- 100 * 1 and t l 7 <- t l 7 + 0) are
             unnecessary (see Exercise 14.3 for a way to eliminate them) and that the instruction
             that sets t l 2 remains in block B5 (induction-variable removal will eliminate it). The
             result is shown in Figure 14.14.
                 Next, the routine sets

                  iv2 = < t i v : t ! 3 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 4 , f c t r :1 0 0 ,b i v : k , d i f f : j>
442   L o o p O p tim iz a tio n s


      and acts similarly: it allocates t l 9 and t20 as the values of t j and db, respectively,
      sets i = B5, j = 4, and SRdone [B5] [4] = true. Next, it appends to the preheader
      (block B3) the instructions
           t20 <- 100 * 1
           t l 9 <- 100 * k
           t l 9 <- t l 7 + j
      appends to block B5 the instruction
           tl9          t l 9 + t20
      and sets
           IVs = { < t i v : k , b lk :B 5 ,p o s :9 , f c t r r l , b i v : k , d i f f : 0>,
                   < tiv :tl2 ,b lk :B 5 ,p o s:3 , fc tr :1 0 0 ,b iv :k ,d iff:0 > ,
                   < tiv :tl3 ,b lk :B 5 ,p o s:4 , f c t r :1 0 0 ,b i v :k ,d i f f :j> ,
                   < t i v : t l 4 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 5 , f c t r : 1 0 0 , b i v : k , d i f f : j-101>,
                   < tiv :tl5 ,b lk :B 5 ,p o s:6 , fc tr :4 0 0 ,b iv :k ,d iff:4 *j- 4 0 4 > ,
                   < t i v : 1 16,b l k :B5, p o s :7, f c t r :40 0 ,b i v :k ,
                           d if f :4 * j- 4 0 4 + ( a d d r a )> ,
                   < t i v : t l 7 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 10,f c t r : 100,b i v : k , d i f f :100),
                   < t i v : t l 9 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 11,f c t r : 100,b i v : k , d i f f : j »
      Finally, the routine replaces all uses of t l 3 by t l 9 . Note that, again, two of the
      instructions inserted into the preheader (namely, t l 8       100 * 1 and t l 7  tl7 +
      0) are unnecessary and the instruction that sets t l 3 remains in block B5. The result
      is shown in Figure 14.15.
           We leave it to the reader to complete the example. The resulting set IVs
      should be
           IVs = { < t i v : k , b lk :B 5 ,p o s :9 , f c t r : l , b i v : k , d i f f : 0>,
                   < t i v : t l 2 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 3 , f c t r : 100,b i v : k , d i f f : 0 > ,
                   < t i v : t l 3 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 4 , f c t r :100,b i v : k , d i f f : j> ,
                   < t i v : t l 4 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 5 , f c t r : 100,b i v : k , d i f f : j-101>,
                   < t i v : 1 15,b l k : B5, p o s :6, f c t r :400,b i v :k , d i f f : 4 * j -404),
                   < t i v : 1 16,b l k : B5, p o s :7, f c t r :40 0 ,b i v :k ,
                           d if f :4 * j- 4 0 4 + ( a d d r a)>,
                   < t i v : t l 7 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 10,f c t r :10 0 ,b i v : k , d i f f : 0 > ,
                   < t i v : t l 9 , b l k : B 5 , p o s : 11,f c t r :10 0 ,b i v : k , d i f f : j> ,
                   < t i v :t 2 1 ,b l k :B 5 ,p o s :1 2 ,f c t r :10 0 ,b i v : k , d i f f : j-101>,
                   <t i v : 12 3 ,b l k : B5, p o s :1 3 ,f c t r :400,b i v : k , d i f f : 4 * j -404),
                   < t i v : t 2 5 , b l k : B5, p o s :1 4 ,f c t r :400,b i v : k ,
                           d i f f : 4*j-404+(addr a )> }
             SRdone [B5] [/] = true only for i = 3, 4 , . . . , 7 and the resulting partial flow-
      graph is shown in Figure 14.16.
             Of course, some of the expressions in B3, such as 4*j-404+(addr a), are not
      legal m ir code, but their expansion to legal code is obvious.
             Removing dead code, doing constant folding, and removing trivial assignments
      in B3 results in the partial flowgraph in Figure 14.17. Note that t8, tlO, tl 2 , tl3 ,
      t ! 4 , t l 5 , and t l 6 are all dead also.
                   Section 14.1        Induction-Variable Optimizations                                443


                                        11 <— 3 * i
                                        j    tl + 1
                                        k    1
                                        t2 <- addr a
                                        t3 <- 100 * i
                                        t4 <- t3 + j
                                        t5 <- t4 - 101
                                        t6 <- 4 * t5
                                  B3    t7 <- t6 + t2
                                        t9 <— 3 * i
                                        til <- addr a
                                        tl8 <- 100 * 1
                                        117    100 * k
                                        tl7 <- tl7 + 0
                                        t20 <- 100 * 1
                                        tl9 <- 100 * k
                                        119    tl7 + j




                         t8 <- [t6](4)
                         tlO <- t8 + t9
                         tl2 <- 100 * k
                         tl3 <- tl7 + j
                         tl4    tl9 - 101
                    B5   tl5 <- 4 * tl4
                         tl6 <- tl5 + til
                         [t16](4) <- tlO
                         k    k + 1
                         tl7    tl7 + tl8
                         tl9    tl9 + t20


 F IG . 1 4 .1 5   The result o f strength-reducing t l 3 on the partial flow graph in Figure 14.14.

                        Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen [KnoR93] give a method for doing strength reduc­
                   tion based on their approach to partial-redundancy elimination (see Section 13.3).
                   However, as discussed at the end of that section, it is a particularly weak variety of
                   strength reduction, so the traditional method given here should be preferred over it.
                        On the other hand, Cooper and Simpson ([CooS95a] and [Simp96]) give a
                   method that extends strength reduction to work on the SSA form of a procedure. The
                   resulting algorithm is as effective as the one described above, and is more efficient.


14.1.3             Live Variables Analysis
                   One tool we need in order to perform the induction-variable transformations that
                   follow as well as for other optimizations, such as register allocation by graph col­
                   oring and dead-code elimination, is live variables analysis. A variable is live at a
444           Loop Optimizations




 FIG. 14,16 The result of strength-reducing the remaining induction variables in the partial flowgraph
            in Figure 14.15.
               Section 14.1         Induction-Variable Optimizations                                445


                                tl       3 * i
                                J       tl + 1
                                k       1
                                t2         addr a
                                t3         100 * i
                                t4         t3 + j
                                t5         t4 - 10 1
                                t6         4 * t5
                                tl         t6 + t 2
                         B3     t9         3 * i
                                t il   <j-- a d d r a
                                t l7   < - 10 0 * k
                                t l9   < - t l7       J
                                t21    <- t l9 - 10 1
                                t2 3   < - 400 * k
                                t27    <- 4        t21
                                t23    <“ t 2 3       t27
                                t25         t23 + t i l




                     t 8 «e- [ t 6 ] (4 )
                     t lO <r- t 8 HH t9
                     t l 2 < - 100 * k
                     t l3 < - t l7 + J
                     t l 4 < - t l9 - 10 1
                     t l5 < - 4 * t2 1
                     t l 6 <r-  CO
                                CN    + t il
                B5
                      [t 2 5 ] (4 )  - t lO
                     k <-- k + 1
                     t l 7 < - t l 7 + 100
                     t l 9 <r- t l 9 + 100
                     t 2 1 <r~ t 2 1 + 100
                     t 2 3 <r- t 2 3 + 400
                     t 2 5 < - t 2 5 + 400



FIG . 1 4.17   The result of doing constant folding and elimination o f trivial assignm ents in block B3
               for the partial flowgraph in Figure 14.16.


               particular point in a program if there is a path to the exit along which its value may
               be used before it is redefined. It is dead if there is no such path.
                   To determine which variables are live at each point in a flowgraph, we perform
               a backward data-flow analysis. Define USE(i) to be the set of variables that are used
               in basic block i before they are defined (if at all) in the block and DEF(i) to be the
               set of variables that are defined in the block before they are used (if at all) in the
               block. A variable is live on entry to block i if it is live at the exit of block i and not
               in DE£(/), or if it is in USE(i), so
446          Loop Optim izations




 FIG. 14.18 Example flowgraph for computing live variables.


                 LVin(i) = (LVout(i) - DEF(i)) U USE(i)

             and a variable is live at the exit of a basic block ifitis live at the entry to any of its
             successors, so

                 LVout(i) =     |^J LVin(j)
                              jeSucc(i)

             The proper initialization is LVout(exit) = 0.
                 As an example of the data-flow analysis for live variables, consider the flow-
             graph in Figure 14.18. The values of D E F () and U SE() are as follows:

                 DEF (entry)       = 0         USE(entry)      = 0
                 DEF( Bl)          = {a,b}     USE(B1)         = 0
                 DEF (B2)          = {c}       USE( B2)        = {a,b}
                 DEF( B3)          = 0         USE( B3)        = {a,c}
                 DEF(ex it)        = 0         USE(exit)       = 0

                 [the values of LVin() and LVout() are as follows:

                 LVin(entry)       = 0         LVout(e ntry)     = 0
                 LVin( Bl)         = 0         LVout( Bl)        = {a,t
                 LVin(B2)          = {a,b}     LVout( B2)        = fa.t
                 LVin(B3)          = {a,c}     LVout( B3)        = 0
                 LVm(exit)         = 0         LVout(ex it)      = 0

             so a and b are live at the entrance to block B2, and a and c are live at the entrance
             to block B3.
               Section 14.1      Induction-Variable Optimizations                                          447

               j=2                            j = 2
               do i = 1,10                    do i = 1,10
                  a(i) = i + 1                   a(i) = j
                     j=J+1                       j = j + 1
               enddo                          enddo
               (a)                            (b)
 FIG. 14.19 Examples of useless induction variables in Fortran 77 code.


14.1.4         Removal of Induction Variables and Linear-Function
               Test Replacement
               In addition to strength-reducing induction variables, we can often remove them
               entirely. The basic criterion for doing so is obvious—that the induction variable serve
               no useful purpose in the program— but this is not always easy to identify. There are
               several ways this situation may arise, as follows:
          1.   The variable may have contributed nothing to the computation to begin with.
         2.    The variable may have become useless as a result of another transformation, such as
               strength reduction.
         3.    The variable may have been created in the process of performing a strength reduction
               and then become useless as a result of another one.
         4.    The variable may be used only in the loop-closing test and may be replaceable by
               another induction variable in that context. This case is known as linear-function test
               replacement.
                    As an example of the first case, consider the variable j in Figure 14.19(a). It
               serves no purpose at all in the loop; assuming that its final value is not used after
               the loop, it can simply be removed. Even if its final value is used, it can be replaced
               by the single assignment j = 12 after the loop. This case is covered by dead-code
               elimination (see Section 18.10).
                    As an example of the second case, consider j in Figure 14.19(b). Here the value
               of j is actually used in the loop, but it is an induction variable in the class of i and
               its value at each use is exactly i + 1, so we can easily remove it.
                    An example of the third case can be seen by transforming the code in Fig­
               ure 14.12. Consider the variable t7, which is initialized to 4 before entering the
               loop and then is assigned to t5 and incremented by 4 inside the loop. We eliminate
               the assignment t5 <- t7 and replace the use of t5 by t7, which results in the code
               in Figure 14.20(a). Now there is no use of the value of t7 in the loop (except to
               increment it), so it and its initialization before the loop can be removed, resulting in
               the code shown in Figure 14.20(b).1


               1. Note that we could also do loop inversion on this example, but we choose not to, so as to deal
               with one issue at a time.
448           Loop Optimizations


                     tl     < - 20 2                          tl          202
                     i        1                               i    <- 1
                     t7           4
                     t3           addr a                      t3 < - addr a
                     t4 < - t3 - 4                            t4 < - t3 - 4
                     t8 < - t4 + 4                            t8      t4 + 4
              L I:   t2 < - i          > 10 0          L I:   t 2 < - i > 10 0
                     i f t 2 g o to L 2                       if   t 2 g o to L 2
                     t l <- t l - 2                           t l <- t l -      2
                     t6 < - t8                                t6      t8
                     * t6             tl                      * t6 < - t l
                     i <- i + 1                               i <- i + 1
                     t8 < - t8 + 4                            t8 < - t8 + 4
                     t 7 <— t 7 + 4
                     g o to L I                               g o to L I
              L2:                                      L2:
              (a)                                      (b)
 FIG. 14.20 Transformed versions of code in Figure 14.12: (a) after removing the induction variable
              t 5 , and (b) after removing t 7 also.




                   If the architecture we are compiling for has loads and stores with base register
              updating, we bias the choice of induction variables we keep to be those that can
              benefit from such instructions, i.e., those that are used to address storage and that
              are incremented by an appropriate amount.
                   The last case, linear-function test replacement, is illustrated by the variable i in
              Figure 14.20— i is initialized before the loop, tested to determine loop termination,
              and incremented inside the loop. It is not used in any other way, except that its final
              value might be needed after the loop. It can be eliminated by determining the final
              value of t8 in the loop, namely, (addr a) + 400 and assigning it to a new temporary
              t9 , replacing the termination test computation by t2 <- t8 > t9 , and removing all
              the statements that use i , which results in the code in Figure 14.21. (Note that we
              have also eliminated t6 by replacing its one use with its value, to simplify the code
              further and to make it more readable.) If i were known to be live at the end of the
              loop, or not known not to be live, we would also insert i <- 100 at L2.
                   To perform induction-variable removal and linear-function test replacement on
              a given loop, we proceed as follows.
                   For each assignment j <- tj that is inserted by the strength-reduction algorithm
              in the previous section, if there are no definitions of tj between the inserted statement
              and any uses of /, then we replace all uses of / by uses of tj and remove the
              inserted statement /      tj. This is exactly what we did in transforming the code in
              Figure 14.20(b) to that in Figure 14.21, along with linear-function test replacement.
              Note that this is a local form of copy propagation.
                   Let i be a basic induction variable used only in computations of other induction
              variables and relations, and let / be an induction variable in the class of i with linear
             Section 14.1                 Induction-Variable Optimizations                       44 9


                 tl <- 202
                 t3 <- addr a
                 t4 <- t3 - 4
                 t8 <- t4 + 4
                 t9 <-
                            CO 00
                            400
                 t2 <-  p p t9
                                    + A
                 if t2 goto L2
                 tl <- tl - 2
                 4
                 00
                 p
                 *     - tl
                 t8 <- t8 + 4
                 goto LI


FIG. 14.21 Result of induction-variable removal (of i and t6) and linear-function test replacement
           on variable i in the code in Figure 14.20(b).


             equation j = b * i + c. We replace the relation computation i ? vywhere ? represents
             a relational operator and v is not an induction variable, by
                 tj <r- b * v
                 tj <r- tj + c
                 j ? tj
             and delete all assignments to i in the loop. If i is live along some paths exiting the
             loop, we place an assignment to i of its final value from the loop at each such exit.
                  One complication in this process is less than obvious and has tripped up several
             compiler writers and authors on strength reduction (see, for example, Section 3.5
             of [A11C81]). Namely, for the relation to remain ? in the replacement statements,
             we must know that b is positive. If it is negative, we need to use the negation of
             the relation, which we denote by ! ? in the replacement expression; specifically, the
             relational expression above becomes

                 / 1? tj
             If b is only a loop invariant, rather than a known constant, we may not know
             whether it is positive or negative. In this case, it may not be worthwhile to do the
             linear-function test replacement, but it can be done nevertheless at the expense of
             increased code size if it is judged to be desirable. One merely needs to test the loop
             invariant’s sign before entering the loop and branch to one of two copies of the
             optimized loop, one of which assumes that it is positive and the other that it is
             negative. While this may not seem profitable, it can be a big win on parallel or vector
             hardware if it allows more parallelism or vectorization to be achieved. Alternatively,
             we can simply split the loop-closing code to test the sign and then branch to the
             appropriate one of two loop-closing tests.
                 If the relation computation involves two induction variables, e.g., il ? /2, both of
             which are used only in computations of other induction variables and relations, the
             transformation is somewhat more complex. If there are induction variables j \ and j l
             with linear equations j l = b * il + c and j l = b * i l + c, respectively, then we can
450            L o o p O p tim iza tio n s


               procedure Remove_IVs_LFTR(bset,nblocks,ninsts,Block,IVs,SRdone,Succ,Pred)
                  bset: in set of integer
                  nblocks: inout integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1••nblocks] of integer
                  Block: inout array [1 “ nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                  IVs: in set of IVrecord
                  SRdone: in array [1-*nblocks] of array [••] of boolean
                  Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
               begin
                  oplt, op2t: enum {con,ind,var}
                  ivl, iv2: IVrecord
                  i, j: integer
                  tj: Var
                  v: Const
                  inst: MIRInst
                  oper: Operator
                  for each ivl e IVs (SRdone[ivl.blk][ivl.pos]) do
                     for each iv2 e IVs (!SRdone[iv2.blk][iv2.pos]
                        & ivl.biv = iv2.biv & ivl.fctr = iv2.fctr
                        & ivl.diff = iv2.diff) do
                         I| if ivl and iv2 have matching equations and ivl
                         I| has been strength-reduced and iv2 has not,
                         II replaces uses of iv2 by uses of ivl
                        for each i e bset do
                            for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                               Replace_Uses(i,j,Block,ivl,iv2)
                            od
                        od
                     od

 FIG. 14.22 Code to implement removal of induction variables and linear-function test replacement.



               simply replace i l ? i2 by /I ? /2, again assuming that b is positive. If there are no
               such induction variables j \ and j l with the same b and c values, the replacement
               is generally not worth doing, since it may introduce two multiplications and an
               addition to the loop in place of less expensive operations.
                    i c a n code that implements the above is shown in Figure 14.22. It uses several
               functions, as follows:1

          1.   in s e r t_ b e fo r e (/,/’, n in s ts ,B lo c k , inst) inserts instruction inst immediately be­
               fore Block [z] [/] and adjusts the data structures accordingly (see Figure 4.14).
          2.   d e le te _ in st ( / , / , n b lo c k s,n in sts,B lo c k ,S u cc,P re d ) deletes the/th instruction in
               Block [z] and adjusts the data structures accordingly (see Figure 4.15).
          3.   R e p la c e _ U se s (/',/, B lo c k , iv l ,iv 2 ) replaces all uses o f z V l .t i v by i v l . t i v in the
               instruction B lo c k [z] [/].
             Section 14.1     Induction-Variable Optimizations                                            451

                     for each i e bset do
                        for j :s 1 to ninsts[i] do
                           if Has_Left(Block[i] [j] .kind) & SRdone[i][j] then
                              if Live_on_Exit(inst.left,bset,Block) then
                                 I| if result variable is live at some exit from the loop,
                                 II compute its final value, assign it to result variable
                                 II at loop exits
                                 v := Final.Value(inst.left,bset,Block)
                                 Insert_Exits(bset,Block,<kind:valasgn,
                                    left:inst.left,opd:<kind:const,val:v >>)
                              fi
                              I| delete instruction Block[i][j] and renumber the tuples
                              II in IVs to reflect the deletion
                              delete_inst(i,j,nblocks,ninst s,Block,Succ,Pred)
                              IVs -= {ivl>
                              for each iv2 e IVs do
                                 if iv2.blk = i & iv2.pos > j then
                                    IVs := (IVs - {iv2»
                                       u {<tiv:iv2.tiv,blk:i,pos:iv2.pos-l,
                                       fctr:iv2.fctr,biv:iv2.biv,diff:iv2.diff>>
                                 fi
                              od
                           fi
                        od
                     od
                od

                                                                                                 (continued)
FIG. 14.22   (continued)

        4.   H a s.L e ft (kd) returns tru e if a mir instruction of kind kd has a left-hand side, and
             f a l s e otherwise (see Figure 4.8).
        5.   C a n o n ic a liz e (m sf ,£l ,£ 2 ), given a mir instruction inst containing a binary rela­
             tional expression, orders the operands so that (a) if either operand is a constant,
             it becomes the first operand, and (b) failing that, if either operand is an induction
             variable, it becomes the first operand; it adjusts the operator if it has reordered the
             operands; and it sets 11 and t l to con, ind, or v a r, according to whether, after
             canonicalization, the first operand or second operand, respectively, is a constant, an
             induction variable, or a variable that is not an induction variable, respectively.
        6.   E v al_ R elE x p r(o p d l ,op r ,o p d 2 ) evaluates the relational expression opd 1 opr o p d l
             and returns the expression’s value (tru e or f a l s e ) .
        7.   BIV (i/,/V s) returns tru e if v occurs as a basic induction variable in the set IVs of
             induction-variable records, and f a l s e otherwise.
        8.   Live_on_Ex±t ( v , b se t, B lock) returns tru e if variable v is live at some exit from
             the loop whose body is the set of blocks given by bset, and f a l s e otherwise (this
452                 Loop Optimizations


                         for each i e bset do
                            j := ninsts[i]
                            inst := Block[i] [j]
                            if inst.kind * binif then
                               goto LI
                            fi
                            I| perform linear-function test replacement
                            Canonicalize(inst,oplt,op2t)
                            if oplt * con then
                               if op2t - con & Eval.RelExpr(inst.opdl,inst.opr,inst.opd2) then
                                  I| if both operands are constants and the relation is true,
                                  I| replace by goto
                                  Block[i][j] := <kind:goto,lbl:inst.lbl>
                               elif op2t = ind then
                                  II if one operand is a constant and the other is an induction
                                  I| variable, replace by a conditional branch based on a
                                  II different induction variable, if possible
                                  if 3ivl e IVs (inst.opd2.val = ivl.tiv & ivl.tiv = ivl.biv) then
                                     if 3iv2 e IVs (iv2.biv = ivl.biv
                                        k iv2.tiv * ivl.tiv) then
                                        tj := new_tmp( )
                                        insert.before(i,j,ninsts,Block,<kind:binasgn,left:tj,
                                            opr:mul,opdl:<kind:const,val:iv2.fctr>,opd2:inst.opdl>)
                                        insert_before(i,j,ninsts,Block,
                                            <kind:binasgn,left:tj,opr:add,
                                            opdl:<kind:const,val:iv2.diff>,opd2:<kind:var,val:tj>>)
                                        oper := inst.opr
                                         I| if new induction variable runs in the opposite direction
                                         II from the original one, invert the test
                                        if iv2.fctr < 0 then
                                            oper := Invert(oper)
                                        fi
                                        Block[i][j] := <kind:binif,opr:oper,
                                            opdl:(kind:var,val:tj >,
                                            opd2:(kind:var,val:iv2.tiv>,lbl:inst.lbl>
                                     fi
                                  fi
                               fi

 F I G . 1 4 .2 2   (continued)


                    p r o p e r t y is c o m p u t e d b y p e r fo r m in g th e live v a r ia b le s d a ta - flo w a n a ly s is d e sc rib e d
                    in th e p r e c e d in g se c tio n ).

              9.    F i n a l _ V a l u e ( i / , f e s ^ ^ , B l o c k ) re tu rn s th e fin al v a lu e o f v a r ia b le v o n e x it fro m the
                    lo o p w h o s e b o d y is th e se t o f b lo c k s g iv e n b y bset.

            10.     I n s e r t . E x i t s (b se t, B l o c k , inst) in se rts th e m i r in str u c tio n inst ju s t a fte r e a c h e x it
                    fr o m th e lo o p .
             Section 14.1       Induction-Variable O ptim izations                                               453


                         elif oplt = ind then
                            if op2t = ind then
                               if 3ivl,iv2 e IVs (ivl * iv2 & ivl.biv = inst.opdl.val
                                  & iv2.biv = inst.opd2.val & ivl.fctr = iv2.fctr
                                  & ivl.diff = iv2.diff) then
                                   I| if both operands are induction variables,...
                                  oper := inst.opr
                                  if iv2.fctr < 0 then
                                      oper := Invert(oper)
                                  fi
                                  Block[i][j] := <kind:binif,opr:oper,
                                      opl:<kind:var,val:ivl.tiv>,
                                      op2:<kind:var,val:iv2.tiv>,lbl:inst.lbl>
                               fi
                            elif op2t = var & BIV(inst.opdl.val,IVs)
                               & 3ivl e IVs (ivl.biv = inst.opdl.val
                               & ivl.tiv * ivl.biv) then
                               tj := new_tmp( )
                               insert_before(i,j,ninsts,Block,
                                  <kind:binasgn,left:tj,opr:mul,
                                  opdl:<kind:const,val:ivl.fctr>,opd2:inst.opd2>)
                               insert_before(i,j,ninsts,Block,
                                  <kind:binasgn,left:tj,opr:add,
                                  opdl:<kind:const,val:ivl.diff >,opd2:<kind:var,val:tj >>)
                               oper := inst.opr
                               if ivl.fctr < 0 then
                                  oper := Invert(oper)
                               fi
                               Block[i][j] := <kind:binif,opr roper,
                                  opdl:<kind:var,val:ivl.tiv>,
                                  opd2:<kind:var,val:tj >,lbl:inst.lbl>
                            fi
                         fi
             LI:   od
               end    II Remove_IVs_LFTR

FIG* 14.22   (continued)




       11.   I n v e r t (o p r) returns the inverse o f the m i r relation al o p e rato r o p r, e.g., fo r " > " it
             returns

       12.   new_tmp( ) returns a new tem p o rary nam e.


             N o te th at a m ore efficient im plem entation o f the nested for lo o p over the in struction s
             at the end o f Rem ove_IV s_LFTR( ) w ou ld keep a tab le describin g the in stru ction s to
             be rem oved an d w ou ld use only a single fo r loop .
454    Loop Optimizations


14.2   Unnecessary Bounds-Checking Elimination
       Bounds checking or range checking refers to determining whether the value of a
       variable is within specified bounds in all of its uses in a program. A typical situation
       is checking that in the reference b [ i , j ] to an element of a Pascal array declared

            var b : array[1..100,1..10] of integer

       i is indeed between 1 and 100 and j is between 1 and 10, inclusive. Another example
       is checking that a use of a variable declared to be of an Ada subrange type, for
       example,

            subtype TEMPERATURE is INTEGER range 32..212;
            i: TEMPERATURE;

       is within the declared range.
            We mention Pascal and Ada in the two examples above because their language
       definitions specifically require that such checking be done (or, equivalently, that the
       language implementation ensure in some fashion that the specified constraints are
       satisfied). Such checking, however, is desirable for any program, regardless of the
       language it is written in, since bounds violations are among the most common pro­
       gramming errors. “ Off-by-one” errors, in which a loop index or other counter runs
       off one end or the other of a range by one—usually resulting in accessing or storing
       into a datum that is not part of the data structure being processed—are one example.
            On the other hand, bounds checking can be very expensive if, for example,
       every array access must be accompanied by two conditional traps2 per dimension to
       determine the validity of the access, as illustrated in Figure 14.23, where we assume
       that trap number 6 is for bounds violation. Here the array access takes eight lines
       of m i r code and the checking takes an additional four lines. The overhead of such
       checking becomes even greater when the array accesses are optimized—then fetching
       the next element of a two-dimensional array may require one or two increments
       and a load, while the bounds checking still requires four conditional traps. Many
       implementations “ solve” this problem, particularly for Pascal, by providing the user
       with a compile-time option to enable or disable the checking. The philosophical
       purpose of this option is to allow the user to enable the checking for development
       and debugging runs of the program, and then, once all the defects have been found
       and fixed, to turn it off for the production version. Thus the overhead is incurred
       while the program is still buggy, and not once it is (believed to be) free of defects.
            However, virtually all software-engineering studies of defects in programs indi­
       cate that versions of systems delivered to customers are likely to have bugs in them
       and many of the bugs are likely to be ones that were not even observed during pre­
       delivery testing. This approach to bounds checking, therefore, is seriously mistaken.
       Rather, bounds checking is just as important for delivered versions of programs as


       2. The i f .. . tra p construct might be implemented by a conditional branch or a conditional trap,
       depending on the architecture, source language, and language implementation.
             Section 14.2      Unnecessary Bounds-Checking Elimination                                       455

             if 1 > i trap 6
             if i > 100 trap 6
             if 1 > j trap 6
             if j > 10 trap 6

             t2 <- addr b
             t3 <- j - 1
             t3 <- t3 * 100
             t3 <- t3 + i
             t3 <- t3 - 1
             t3 <- t3 * 4
             t3 <- t2 + t3
             t4 <- *t3

FIG. 14.23 Example of mir bounds-checking code for accessing the array element b [ i , j] in Pascal.


             var b: array[1..100,1..10] of integer;
                i, j, s: integer;
             s := 0;
             for i = 1 to 50 do
                for j = 1 to 10 do
                   s :— s + b[i,j]

FIG. 14.24 Pascal example in which no bounds-checking code is needed for accessing b [ i , j ] .


             for development versions. Instead of providing a way to turn bounds checking off,
             what is needed is to optimize it so that it rarely costs anything and has minimal over­
             all cost. For example, if our fetching of b [ i , j ] in Figure 14.23 is embedded in a loop
             nest that prescribes the ranges of the subscripts and restricts them to legal values, as
             in Figure 14.24, then the checking code is totally unnecessary. As a second example,
             if the upper bound on the outer loop were changed to a variable n, rather than the
             constant 50, we would only need to check once before entering the outer loop that
             n <= 100 is satisfied and take the trap then if it isn’t.3
                  Such optimization is relatively easy, and for many programs in some languages,
             it is nearly trivial. In fact, we have most of the required methods for it available
             already, namely, invariant code motion, common-subexpression elimination, and
             induction-variable transformations. The one remaining tool we need is a way to
             represent the bounds-checking constraints that must be satisfied. To do this, we


             3. Note that we assume that the trap terminates execution of the program or, at least, that it cannot
             result in resumption of execution at the point where the trap occurs. This is essential because
             bounds-checking code that we cannot eliminate entirely we (wherever possible) move out of loops
             containing it. Thus, the trap would not occur at the same point in execution of the program as it
             would have originally, although we ensure that it occurs if and only if it would have occurred in
             the unmodified program.
456        Loop O ptim izations


           introduce range expressions. A range expression is an inequality that applies to the
           value of a variable. Its form is

               lo ? var ? hi

           where var is a variable name, lo and hi are constants representing the minimal and
           maximal values (respectively) of the range, and ? is a relational operator. If the
           variable’s value is constrained at only one end, we use ® or       to represent the other
           bound.
                For example, for the code in Figure 14.24, the two range expressions we
           must satisfy for the statement s : = s + b [ i , j ] to require no run-time checks are
           1 ^ i ^ 100 and 1 ^ j ^ 10, as required by the declaration of array b. To determine
           that these range expressions are satisfied for this statement, we only need to be able
           to deduce from the first f o r statement that 1 < i £ 100 holds within it and from the
           second that 1 < j < 10 holds within it. This is trivial in Pascal, since the two f o r
           statements respectively establish the inequalities as valid, and the semantics of the
           language require that the iteration variable not be modified in a f o r loop, except by
           the f o r statement itself. For other languages, it may not be so easy— C, for example,
           places no restrictions on the expressions that may occur in its f o r loop construct,
           nor does it even have a concept of an iteration variable.
                The simplest and by far the most common case of optimizable range-checking
           code is a range check embedded in a loop, such as the example in Figure 14.24 above.
           For concreteness, we assume the following:1

      1.   that the loop has an iteration variable i with an initial value of init and a final value
           of fin,
      2.   that i increases by 1 on each iteration, and
      3.   that only the loop-control code modifies i.

           We further assume that the range expression to be satisfied is lo ^ v ^ hi.
                The easiest case to handle is that v is loop-invariant. In this case, we need
           only move the code that checks that lo ^ v ^ hi from inside the loop to the loop’s
           preheader. O f course, if it can be evaluated at compile time, we do that.
                The next case is that the range expression to be satisfied is lo ^ i ^ hi, where i
           is the loop-control variable. In this case, the range expression is satisfied as long as
           lo z init and fin ^ hi. We insert code to check the first of these inequalities into the
           loop’s preheader. We also insert code there to compute 11 = min {fin ,hi) and replace
           the loop-closing test that compares i to fin by one that compares it to t \. Following
           the normal exit from the loop, we insert code to check that the final value of i has
           reached the value it would have reached before the transformation, i.e., we insert a
           check that i > fin. If any of the checks fail, a trap is taken. Again, of course, if the
           checks can be evaluated at compile time, they are. An example of the code before
           and after the transformation is shown in Figure 14.25.
                The last case we consider is that an induction variable j (see Section 14.1) in the
           class of the basic induction variable i with linear equation j = b * i + c must satisfy
             Section 14.3            Wrap-Up                                                         457

                                                               i f lo > i n i t t r a p 6
                                                               tl     f i n m in h i
                    i < - in it                                i < - in it
             L I:    . . .                              L I:   .    .       .
                    if   i   < lo t r a p 6
                    i f i > h i tra p 6
                    use o f i that m u st                      use o f i th a t m u st
                         sa tisfy l o   ^ i   ^ hi                sa tis fy l o < i < h i


                    i <- i + 1                                 i    <- i          + 1
                    i f i <= f i n      g o to L I             if       i       <= t l g o to L I
                                                               if       i       <= f i n t r a p 6

                                                        (b)
FIG* 14.25 Bounds-checking transformation: (a) the original loop, and (b) the transformed code.


             the range expression lo £ j £ hi. In this case, we have / = b * / + c, and so i must
             satisfy

                    (/o - c)//? < / < (hi - c )/b

             for / to satisfy its range expression. The appropriate transformation is an easy
             generalization of the preceding case.
                  The second and third assumptions above, namely, that i increases by 1 on each
             iteration and that only the loop-control code modifies /, can both be relaxed to allow
             decreasing loop indexes, increments and decrements by values other than 1, and
             simple modifications of i within the loop. We leave these for the reader to consider.
                  It is also possible to do data-flow analysis that propagates range expressions
             through a procedure to determine where they are satisfied and where checking is
             needed. However, this can be very expensive, since the lattice used includes all range
             expressions lo < v ^ hi for lo, hi e X U {—oo, oo} with the ordering

                    (/ol < i; < h il) c (/o2 < v < hi2 )

             if and only if /ol ^ lo2 and hi 1 £ h il—a lattice that is both infinitely wide and
             infinitely high. At least, if we begin with a range expression lo ^ v £ hi with finite lo
             and hi values, it has only finite (but unbounded) chains ascending from there.



14.3         Wrap-Up
             The optimizations we have discussed in this chapter either operate exclusively on
             loops or are most effective when applied to loops. They can be done on either
             medium-level or low-level intermediate code. They apply directly to the disciplined
             source-language loop constructs in Fortran, Ada, and Pascal, but they require that
             we define a subclass of similarly behaved loops in a language like C (or those that
             are constructed from ifs and gotos in any language) for them to be safely employed.
458           L oop O p tim ization s




 FIG. 14.26 Place of loop optimizations (in bold type) in an aggressive optimizing compiler.

                   We have covered two classes o f optim izations, namely, induction-variable op­
              tim izations and unnecessary bounds-checking elimination. Figure 14.26 shows in
              bold type where we place the optim izations discussed in this chapter in the overall
              structure o f the optim ization process.
                   Induction-variable optim ization requires that we first identify induction vari­
              ables in a loop, then perform strength reduction on them, and finally perform linear-
              function test replacement and remove redundant induction variables. We perform
              this series o f optim izations on nested loops starting with the most deeply nested ones
              and then moving outward.
                   Elimination of unnecessary bounds checking is an optimization that applies both
              inside and outside loops but that has its biggest impact inside loops, because bounds
            Section 14.4    Further Reading                                                   459




FIG. 14.26 (continued)



            checks inside loops are performed with each iteration unless they are optimized away
            or at least reduced.



14.4        Further Reading
            The foundation of the application of finite differences to computer programs is due
            to Babbage, as described in [Gold72]. Allen and Cocke’s application of strength re­
            duction to operations other than additions and multiplications appears in [A11C81].
            The generalization of finite differences, called formal differentiation, and its appli­
            cation to the very high level language setl are discussed by Paige and Schwartz
            [PaiS77]. Chow [Chow83] and Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen [KnoR93] extend
            partial-redundancy elimination to include a weak form of strength reduction.
                 Cooper and Simpson’s approach to SSA-based strength reduction is described
            in [CooS95a] and [Simp96].
                 More modern approaches to bounds-checking optimization are found in, e.g.,
            Gupta [Gupt93] and Kolte and Wolfe [KolW95], the latter of which uses partial-
            redundancy elimination to determine the most efficient places to move bounds
            checks to.
460           Loop Optimizations


14.5           Exercises
        14.1 As indicated at the end of Section 14.1, instructions that perform a storage access
             in which one of the operands is scaled or modified or that perform an arithmetic
             operation, a test, and a conditional branch based on the test may be useful in guiding
             strength reduction, induction-variable removal, and linear-function test replacement.
             (See Figure 14.27 for an example.) (a) How would you decide which of these
             instructions to use? (b) At what point in the optimization and code-generation
             process would you make the decision?
  ADV 14.2 Formulate identification of induction variables as a data-flow analysis and apply it
           to the example in Figure 14.9.
        14.3 As written, the ican code in Figure 14.10 always introduces the new temporary that
             is the value of db and initializes it in the loop’s preheader, (a) Modify the code so that
             it doesn’t do this when it’s not needed. What about the instructions that assign the
             initial value of the variable that is t j ’s value? (b) Note that there are also situations,
             such as the induction variable t l 4 in Figure 14.9, for which either the factor (f ctr)
             or the difference (d if f ) is not simply a constant or variable that can be used as is in
             performing strength reduction. Modify the code to recognize such situations and to
             handle them properly.
        14.4 Write an ican routine to do elimination of unnecessary bounds checking.
        14.5 Generalize the transformation of bounds checking discussed in Section 14.2 to en­
             compass (a) checking induction variables and (b) more general modifications of the
             loop index, as discussed near the end of the section. Add the appropriate code to the
             routine written for Exercise 14.4.
        14.6 Extend the linear-function test replacement part of the algorithm in Figure 14.22 to
             deal with loop constants that are not compile-time constants.
        14.7 Continue the example in Figure 14.9 by replacing blocks B3, B4, and B5 by the ones
             in Figure 14.17 and then doing (a) induction-variable removal and linear-function
             test replacement on the inner loop and (b) doing the full sequence of induction-
             variable optimizations on the outer loop.
 RSCH 14.8 Read one of [Gupt93] or [KolW95] and write ican code to implement its approach
           to bounds checking.

                  i <- 1
              LI: rl <- 4 * i
                  r2 <- (addr a) + rl
                  r3 <- [r2] (4)
                  r3 <- r3 + 2
                  [r2] (4) <- r3
                  i <- i + 1
                  if i < 20 goto LI

 FIG. 14.27 Example of a lir loop for which address scaling, address modification, and operation-
            test-and-branch instructions might all be useful.
                                                                              CHAPTER 15



                 Procedure Optimizations




       I
            n this chapter, we discuss three pairs of optimizations that apply to whole
            procedures and that, in all cases but one, do not require data-flow analysis to
            be effective. The pairs of optimizations are tail-recursion elimination and the
            more general tail-call optimization, procedure integration and in-line expansion,
       and leaf-routine optimization and shrink wrapping. The first pair turns calls into
       branches. The second pair is two versions of the same optimization, the first applied
       to mid- or high-level intermediate code and the second to low-level code. The final
       pair optimizes the calling conventions used in a language implementation.


15.1   Tail-Call Optimization and Tail-Recursion
       Elimination
       Tail-call optimization and its special case, tail-recursion elimination, are transfor­
       mations that apply to calls. They often reduce or eliminate a significant amount of
       procedure-call overhead and, in the case of tail-recursion elimination, enable loop
       optimizations that would otherwise not apply.
            A call from procedure f ( ) to procedure g ( ) is a tail call if the only thing
       f ( ) does, after g ( ) returns to it, is itself return. The call is tail-recursive if f ( )
       and g ( ) are the same procedure. For example, the call to in s e r t.n o d e ( ) in the C
       code in Figure 15.1 is tail-recursive, and the call to make_node( ) is a (nonrecursive)
       tail call.
            Tail-recursion elimination has the effect of compiling in s e r t .node ( ) as if it
       were written as shown in Figure 15.2, turning the recursion into a loop.
            We cannot demonstrate the effect of tail-call optimization at the source-language
       level, since it would violate C ’s semantics (as well as the semantics of virtually any
       other higher-level language) to branch from the body of one procedure into the body
       of another, but it can be thought of in a similar way: the arguments to make .node ( )

                                                                                              461
462           Procedure O p tim ization s


              void make_node(p,n)
                 struct node *p;
                 int n;
              { struct node *q;
                 q = malloc(sizeof(struct node));
                 q->next = nil;
                 q->value = n;
                 p->next = q;
              >
              void insert_node(n,l)
                 int n;
                 struct node *1;
              { if (n > l->value)
                    if (l->next == nil) make.node(1,n);
                    else insert_node(n,l->next);
              }
  FIG. 15.1   Example of a tail call and tail recursion in C.


              void insert_node(n,l)
                 int n;
                 struct node *1;
              {loop:
                 if (n > l->value)
                     if (l->next == nil) make.node(1,n);
                     else
                     { 1 := l->next;
                        goto loop;
                     >
              }
  FIG. 15.2   Effect of tail-recursion elimination on in s e r t .node ( ) shown in the source code.


              are put on the stack (or in the appropriate registers) in place of i n s e r t .n ode ( ) ’s
              arguments and the call instruction is replaced by a branch to the beginning of
              m ake.node ( ) ’s body.
                   This would also violate the semantics o f m i r , since param eter names are local
              to procedures. However, we can demonstrate it in lir. lir code corresponding to
              Figure 15.1 is shown in Figure 15.3(a); we arbitrarily choose for this example to
              pass the param eters in registers r l and r2 . The result o f optimizing the tail call to
              m ak e.n od e( ) is shown in Figure 15.3(b). Even this version hides one subtle issue,
              since we have not m ade memory stacks explicit in it. Namely, it is possible that the
              stack frame o f the caller and callee have different sizes. If the caller’s stack frame
              is larger than the callee’s, we merely need to arrange that the callee’s procedure
              epilogue (see Section 5.6) deallocates the caller’s whole stack frame. This can most
              easily be arranged by having a frame pointer that is the caller’s stack pointer (or,
              in this case, the caller’s caller’s stack pointer) and then recovering the stack pointer
              by assigning the frame pointer to it on exit, as, for exam ple, Sun’s sparc compilers
           Section 15.1    Tail-Call Optimization and Tail-Recursion Elimination                463

           make_node:                            make_node:
               r4 <- rl                              r4 <- rl
               rl     8                              rl <- 8
               r3 <- call malloc                     r3 <- call malloc
               r3 *. next <- nil                     r3 *. next < - nil
               r3 *. value <- r2                     r3 *. value <- r2
               r4 *. next <- r3                      r4 *. next <- r3
               return                                return
           insert_node:                          insert_node:
               r4 <r- r2 *. value                    r4 <- r2 *. value
               r5 <r- rl > r4                        r5 < - rl > r4
               if !r5 goto LI                        if !r5 goto LI
               r6 <- r2 *. next                      r6 <- r2 *. next
               r7 <- r6 = nil                        r7 <- r6 = nil
               if !r7 goto L2                        if !r7 goto L2
               r2 <- rl                              r2 <- rl
               rl <- r4                              rl <- <- r4
               call make_node                        goto make_node
               return
           L2: r2 <- r2 *. next                  L2: r2 <- r2 *. next
               call insert_node                      goto insert.node
               return
           LI: return                            LI: return
            (a)                                  (b)
FIG. 15.3 (a) lir code corresponding to         e 15.1, and (b) the result of performing tail-call
          optimization on both calls in i       ;_node( ).



           do (Section 21.1). If the caller’s stack frame is smaller than the callee’s, we need to
           arrange to allocate the remainder of the callee’s stack frame either before entering
           or on entry to the callee, or we need to deallocate the caller’s stack frame before
           jumping to the callee and then do the standard procedure prologue on entering the
           callee.
                Determining that a call is a tail call is trivial. It only requires checking that the
           routine performing the call does nothing after the call returns except itself return,
           possibly returning a value returned by the callee in the process. Performing tail-
           recursion elimination is straightforward. As shown in our example above, it can
           usually even be done in the source code. All it requires is replacing the recursive
           call by assigning the proper values to the parameters, followed by a branch to the
           beginning of the body of the procedure and deleting the retu rn that previously
           followed the recursive call. Figure 15.4 gives ican code to perform tail-recursion
           elimination on a mir procedure.
                Performing general tail-call optimization requires more work. First we must
           ensure that both procedure bodies are visible to the compiler at once, or, at least, that
           enough information about the callee is available during compilation of the caller to
           make the transformation possible. We may have both procedure bodies visible either
           because they are in the same compilation unit or because the compiling system has
           the option of saving intermediate-code representations of procedures, as the mips
464           P rocedure O p tim iza tio n s


              procedure Tail_Recur_Elim(ProcName,nblocks,ninsts,Block,en,Succ)
                  ProcName: in Procedure
                  nblocks, en: in integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
                  Block: inout array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                  Succ: in integer — > set of integer
              begin
                  i , j, b := ♦Succ(en): integer
                  l j : Label
                  inst: MIRInst
                  I| make sure there’s a label at the beginning of the procedure’s body
                  if Block[b][1].kind = label then
                       lj := Block[b][1].lbl
                  else
                       lj := new_label( )
                       insert.before(b,1,ninsts,Block,<kind:label,lbl:1j >)
                  fi
                  for i := 1 to nblocks do
                       inst := Block[i][ninsts[i]-1]
                       if (inst.kind = callasgn & inst.proc = ProcName
                           & Block[i] [ninsts[i]] .kind * retval)
                           V (inst.kind = call & inst.proc * ProcName
                           & Block[i][ninsts[i]].kind = return) then
                           I| turn tail call into parameter assignments
                           I| and branch to label of first block
                           for j := 1 to linst.argsl do
                              Block[i][ninsts[i]+j-2] := <kind:valasgn,
                                left:Block[b][j].left,
                                opd:Block[i][ninsts[i]-1].argslj@l>
                           od
                           ninsts[i] += Iinst.argsI + 1
                           Block[i][ninsts[i]] := <kind:goto,lbl:lj>
                       fi
                  od
              end        |I Tail_Recur_Elim

  FIG, 15.4   ican code to perform tail-recursion elimination.



              com pilers do. H ow ever, all we really need to know ab ou t the callee is three things,
              as follow s:

         1.   where it expects to find its param eters,

        2.    where to branch to in order to begin executing its body, and

        3.    how large its stack fram e is.

              T h is inform ation could be saved in a form that stores only representations o f proce­
              dure interfaces, rather than their bodies. If only interfaces are available, we m ay not
              be able to perform the transform ation if the caller’s stack fram e is larger than the
            Section 15.2    Procedure Integration                                                465

            callee’s—this depends on the convention used for allocating and deallocating stack
            frames (see Section 5.4).
                 To perform the optimization, we replace the call by three things, as follows:
       1.   evaluation of the arguments of the tail call and putting them where the callee expects
            to find them;
       2.   if the callee’s stack frame is larger than the caller’s, an instruction that extends the
            stack frame by the difference between the two; and
       3.   a branch to the beginning of the body of the callee.
                 One issue in performing tail-call optimization is the addressing modes and spans
            of call and branch instructions in each architecture. In Alpha, for example, there is
            no problem since the jmp and j s r routines both use the contents of a register as the
            target and differ only in whether the return address is saved or discarded. Similarly in
            the mips architectures, j a l and j both take a 26-bit absolute word target address. In
            sparc , on the other hand, c a l l takes a 30-bit PC-relative word displacement, while
            ba takes a 22-bit PC-relative word displacement and jmpl takes a 32-bit absolute
            byte address computed as the sum of two registers. While the first and second present
            no difficulties in turning the call into a branch, the last requires that we materialize
            the target address in a register.


15.2        Procedure Integration
            Procedure integration, also called automatic inlining,> replaces calls to procedures
            with copies of their bodies. It can be a very useful optimization, because it changes
            calls from opaque objects that may have unknown effects on aliased variables and
            parameters to local code that not only exposes its effects (see also Chapter 19) but
            that can be optimized as part of the calling procedure.
                  Some languages provide the programmer with a degree of control over inlining.
            C++, for example, provides an explicit in lin e attribute that may be specified for a
            procedure. Ada provides a similar facility. Both are characteristics of the procedure,
            not of the call site. While this is a desirable option to provide, it is significantly
            less powerful and discriminating than automatic procedure integration can be. An
            automatic procedure integrator can differentiate among call sites and can select
            the procedures to integrate according to machine-specific and performance-related
            criteria, rather than by depending on the user’s intuition.
                  The opportunity to optimize inlined procedure bodies can be especially valuable
            if it enables loop transformations that were originally inhibited by having procedure
            calls embedded in loops or if it turns a loop that calls a procedure, whose body
            is itself a loop, into a nested loop. The classic example of this situation is the
            saxpy( ) procedure in Linpack, shown with its calling context in Figure 15.5. After
            substituting the body of saxpy ( ) in place of the call to it in sg e f a ( ) and renaming
            the labels and the variable n so they don’t conflict, the result easily simplifies to the
            nested loop shown in Figure 15.6. The result is a doubly nested loop to which a
            series of valuable optimizations can be applied.
466           P ro c e d u re O p tim iz a tio n s


                   subroutine sgefa(a,lda,n,ipvt,info)
                   integer Ida,n,ipvt(1),info
                   real a(lda,l)
                   real t
                   integer isamax,j,k,kpl,l,nml

                            do 30 j = kpl, n
                               t = a(l,j)
                               if (1 .eq. k) go to 20
                                  a(l,j) = a(k,j)
                                  a(k,j) = t
              20               continue
                               call saxpy(n-k,t,a(k+l,k),l,a(k+l,j),1)
              30            continue

                 subroutine saxpy(n,da,dx,incx,dy,incy)
                 real dx(l),dy(l),da
                 integer i ,incx,incy,ix,iy,m ,mp1,n
                 if (n .le. 0) return
                 if (da .eq. ZERO) return
                 if (incx .eq. 1 .and. incy .eq. 1) go to 20
                 ix = 1
                 iy = 1
                 if (incx .It. 0) ix = (-n+l)*incx + 1
                 if (incy .It. 0) iy = (-n+l)*incy + 1
                 do 10 i = l,n
                     dy(iy) = dy(iy) + da*dx(ix)
                     ix = ix + incx
                     iy = iy + incy
              10 continue
                 return
              20 continue
                 do 30 i = l,n
                     dy(i) = dy(i) + da*dx(i)
              30 continue
                 return
                 end

  FIG. 15.5 The Unpack routine saxpy ( ) and its calling context in sg e fa ( ).



                  There are several issues to consider in deciding how broadly procedure integra­
              tion is to be provided in a compiling system and, based on deciding these issues,
              how to implement it. First, is it to be provided across multiple compilation units, or
              only within single ones? If the former, then a way needs to be provided to save the
              intermediate-code representations of procedures, or more likely, whole compilation
              units in files, since one does not generally depend on the compiler user to decide
              what procedures to inline. If the latter, then one does not need this facility—one
              needs only to be able to preserve the intermediate code as long as it is needed within
            Section 15.2    Procedure Integration                                             467

                 subroutine sgefa(a,Ida,n ,ipvt,info)
                 integer lda,n,ipvt(1),info
                 real a(lda,l)
                 real t
                 integer isamax,j,k,kpl,l,nml

                       do 30 j = kpl, n
                           t = a(l,j)
                           if (1 .eq. k) go to 20
                              a(l,j) = a(k,j)
                              a(k,j) = t
            20            continue
                           if (n-k .le. 0) goto 30
                           if (t .eq. 0) goto 30
                           do 40 i = l,n-k
                              a(k+i,j) = a(k+i,j) + t*a(k+i,k)
            40            continue
            30         continue


FIG. 15.6 A fragment of the Unpack routine sgef a ( ) after integrating saxpyC ) into it.

            a single compilation to do the appropriate inlinings. In fact, one might even choose
            to do it in source-code form in the latter case.
                 Second, if one is providing procedure integration across compilation units, then
            one needs to decide whether to require that the caller and the callee be written in the
            same language or whether to allow them to be in different languages. The primary
            consideration here is that different languages have different conventions for passing
            parameters and accessing nonlocal variables, and the conventions, of course, need
            to be respected by inlined procedures. One technique for handling the differences
            in parameter-passing conventions is to provide “ e x te rn a l language_name proce­
            dure_name” declarations as parts of the interfaces to separately compiled procedures
            in the source languages, so as to specify the source languages in which the external
            procedures are written. These would result in calls to an external routine that fol­
            low the parameter-passing conventions of the language the routine is declared to be
            written in.
                 Third, in a cross-compilation-unit procedure integrator, there is the question of
            whether there is any need to keep intermediate-code copies of routines that have
            been inlined. In particular, several languages restrict the visibility of procedures to
            the scopes they are nested in. This is the case, for example, for nested procedures
            in Pascal, for non-interface procedures in the Modula language family and Mesa,
            for statement procedures in Fortran 77, and for procedures that are not declared
            external in Fortran 90. If the only goal of saving intermediate code is to perform
            procedure integration, copies of such procedures clearly do not need to be kept in
            the saved intermediate code for a compilation unit, since they cannot be referenced
            from outside their scopes. On the other hand, if the goal of saving intermediate code
            is to reduce recompilation time in a programming environment after a change has
            been made to the source code, it is clearly desirable to keep them.
468        Procedure Optimizations


                Fourth, given that one has inlined a procedure at all visible call sites, is there
           a need to compile a copy of the whole procedure? There may be if the procedure’s
           address has been taken in C or if it may be called from other compilation units that
           are not currently visible.
                Finally, should one perform any inlining on recursive procedures? Obviously,
           one should not inline them until one runs out of calls to them, because that could
           be an infinite process, but it can be valuable to inline a recursive procedure once or
           twice to reduce the overhead of calling it.
                Several policy questions need to be answered to decide what procedures are
           worth inlining, keeping in mind that our goal is to speed up execution. On the face
           of it, it may seem that inlining every procedure at every call site would result in the
           greatest speedup. However, this is generally not the case, because it may result in
           an arbitrary increase in the size of the object code and may cause compilation to
           be terminated only by exhaustion of resources. This is not to suggest that inlining
           recursive procedures is necessarily bad; rather, one must simply know when it is
           desirable and when to stop.
                Increasing the size of the object code has several potential drawbacks, the most
           important of which is its impact on cache misses. As the speeds of processors and
           memories diverge ever further, cache misses become more and more important as
           determiners of overall performance. Thus, decisions as to what procedures to inline
           need to be based either on heuristics or profiling feedback. Some typical heuristics
           take into account the following:

      1.   the size of the procedure body (the smaller the better),
      2.   how many calls there are to the procedure (if there is only one call, inlining it should
           almost always result in reducing execution time),
      3.   whether the procedure is called inside a loop (if so, it is more likely to provide
           significant opportunities for other optimizations), and
      4.   whether a particular call includes one or more constant-valued parameters (if so, the
           inlined procedure body is more likely to be optimizable than if not).

                Once one has selected criteria for deciding what procedures are worth inlining at
           what call sites, there remains the issue of how to perform the inlining. The obvious
           part of the process is replacing a call with a copy of the corresponding procedure
           body. We assume, for the sake of generality, that we are doing so at the intermediate-
           code level, so we can do cross-language inlining. The three major issues that arise
           are (1) satisfying the parameter-passing conventions of the (possibly two) languages
           involved, (2) handling name conflicts between the caller and the callee, and (3)
           dealing with static variables.
                First, if “ e x te rn a l language_name procedure _name” declarations are not
           provided, the procedure integrator must include sufficient knowledge about the
           parameter-passing mechanisms of the languages involved to determine what com­
           binations work and how to make them work. It must not, for example, match a
           call-by-reference Fortran argument with a call-by-value C parameter, unless the C
           parameter is of a pointer type. Similarly, it must not blithely substitute a caller’s
            Section 15.2                    Procedure Integration                                  469

            g(b,c)
            int b , c;
            {   int a, d;
                a = b + c;
                d = b * c;
                return d;                                           f( )
            >                                                           int a, e, d;
            f( )                                                        a = 2;
            {   int a, e;                                               a = 3 + 4;
                a = 2;                                                  d = 3 * 4;
                            'faO
                  <D   ii          CO   5                               e = d;
                  printf ("’
                           /,d\n",a) ;                                  printf ("#
                                                                                 /«d\n",a);
            >                                                       >
            (a)                                                     (b)
FIG* 15.7 Capture of a caller’s variable in C by a call-by-value parameter that results from simply
          substituting the callee’s text for a call.

            variable name for a call-by-value parameter, as illustrated in Figure 15.7, resulting
            in a spurious assignment to the caller’s variable. The variable a occurs in both f ( )
            and g ( ); substituting the text of g ( ) directly for the call to it results in erroneously
            assigning to the caller’s a.
                  The second problem is usually not an issue if one is working in an intermediate
            code that does not include source symbol names—symbol references are usually
            pointers to symbol-table entries and labels are usually pointers to intermediate-code
            locations. If one is working on a character representation, one must detect name
            conflicts and resolve them by renaming, usually in the body of the called procedure.
                  Static variables present a different sort of problem. In C in particular, a variable
            with static storage class has an extent that lasts through execution of the whole
            program. If it is declared with file-level scope, i.e., not within any function definition,
            it is initialized before execution of the program and is visible within all functions in
            the file that do not redeclare the variable. If, on the other hand, it is declared within
            a function, it is visible only within that function. If several functions declare static
            local variables with the same name, they are distinct objects.
                  Thus, for a file-level static variable, there needs to be only one copy of it in the
            resulting object program and, if it is initialized, it needs to be initialized exactly once.
            This can be handled by making the variable have global scope and by providing a
            global initialization for it.
                  Cooper, Hall, and Torczon [CooH92] report a cautionary tale on the effects
            of procedure integration. They did an experiment in which they integrated 44%
            of the call sites measured statically in the double-precision version of the Unpack
            benchmark, thus reducing the dynamic number of calls by 98% . Whereas they
            expected the program’s performance to improve, it actually worsened by over 8%
            when run on a m ips R2000-based system. Analysis of the code showed that the
            performance decrease was not due to cache effects or register pressure in a critical
            loop. Rather, the number of nops and floating-point interlocks had increased by
            75%. The problem lies in the m ips compiler’s following the Fortran 77 standard
470    Procedure Optimizations


       and not doing interprocedural data-flow analysis: the standard allows a compiler
       to assume on entry to a procedure that there is no aliasing among the parameters
       and to put that information to use in generating code, and the m ips compiler
       did so for the original version of the program. On the other hand, with most of
       the critical procedures inlined and without interprocedural analysis, there is no
       knowledge available as to whether what were their parameters are aliased or not,
       so the compiler does the safe thing—it assumes that there may be aliases among
       them and generates worse code.



15.3   In-Line Expansion
       In-line expansion is a mechanism that enables substitution of low-level code in
       place of a call to a procedure. It is similar in effect to procedure integration (see
       Section 15.2), except that it is done at the assembly-language or machine-code
       level and so can be used to substitute hand-tailored sequences of code for high-
       level operations, including the use of instructions a compiler would never generate.
       Thus, it is both an optimization and a way to provide high-level mnemonics for
       fundamental machine operations, such as setting bits in a program status word.
            As an optimization, in-line expansion can be used to provide the best available
       instruction sequences for operations that might otherwise be difficult or impossible
       for an optimizer to achieve. Examples include computing the minimum of a series of
       up to four integers without any branches on an architecture that allows conditional
       nullification of the next instruction (such as pa-r is c ) or conditional moves by pro­
       viding three templates, one each for two, three, and four operands;1 and exchanging
       the values of two integer registers in three operations without using a scratch register
       by doing three exclusive or’s, as exemplified by the following lir code:

           ra <r- ra xor rb
           rb <r- ra xor rb
           ra <r- ra xor rb

       It can also be used as a poor man’s version of procedure integration: the user or the
       provider of a compiler or library can provide templates for procedures that are likely
       to benefit from inlining.
            As a mechanism for incorporating instructions that do not correspond to higher-
       level language operations at all, in-line expansion provides a way to give them
       mnemonic significance and to make them accessible without the overhead of a
       procedure call. This can make writing an operating system or I/O device driver in
       a higher-level language much easier than it would otherwise be. If, for example,
       setting bit 15 in the program status word were the way to disable interrupts for a


       1. The choice of four operands maximum is, of course, arbitrary. One could provide for as many
       operands as one wanted by providing additional templates or, given a sufficiently powerful language
       in which to express the templates, one could provide a process for handling any number of
       operands.
Section 15.3       In-Line Expansion                                                471

particular architecture, one could provide a template called D isa b leln te rru p tsC )
that consists of three instructions such as

    getpsw     ra                       IIcopy PSW into ra
    ori        ra,0x8000,ra             IIset bit 15
    setpsw     ra                      || copy ra to PSW

     Two mechanisms are essential to providing an in-line expansion capacity. One
is a way to make an assembly-language sequence into a template and the other is the
compiler phase, which we call the inliner, that performs the inlining. A third may be
needed for instances like the example just above, namely, a way to specify that a real
register needs to be substituted for ra. A template generally consists of a header that
gives the name of the procedure and may include information about the number and
types of expected arguments and register needs, a sequence of assembly-language
instructions, and a trailer to terminate the template. For example, if the necessary
information for a particular inliner consisted of the name of the routine, the number
of bytes of arguments expected, a list of the register identifiers that need to have
real registers substituted for them, and a sequence of instructions, it might take
the form

    . template      ProcName, ArgBytes, regs= (rl, . . . , rn)

    instructions

    .end

For example, the following template might serve for computing the maximum of
three integer values on a sparc system:

    .template max3,12,regs=(@rl)
    mov    argregl,@rl
    cmp    argreg2,@rl
    movg   argreg2,@r1
    cmp    argreg3,@rl
    movg   argreg3,@r1
    mov    @rl,resreg
    .end

    The mechanism for providing in-line expansion is generally to provide one or
more files that contain assembly-language templates for calls to be in-line expanded
and a compilation phase that searches specified template files for procedure names
that occur in the module being compiled and replaces calls to them with instantiated
copies of the appropriate templates. If compilation includes an assembly-language
step, this is all that is essential; if it doesn’t, the templates can be preprocessed to
produce whatever form is required.
     In most cases, the templates need to satisfy the parameter-passing conventions
of the language implementation, and code quality will benefit from optimizations
472      Procedure Optimizations


         performed after or as part of inlining to remove as much as possible of the parameter­
         passing overhead. Frequently register coalescing (see Section 16.3.6) is all that is
         needed to accomplish this.


15.4     Leaf-Routine Optimization and Shrink Wrapping
         A leaf routine is a procedure that is a leaf in the call graph of a program, i.e.,
         one that calls no (other) procedures. Leaf-routine optimization takes advantage of
         a procedure’s being a leaf routine to simplify the way parameters are passed to it
         and to remove as much as possible of the procedure prologue and epilogue overhead
         associated with being able to call other procedures. The exact changes that it makes
         vary according to the amount of temporary storage required by the procedure and
         both the architecture and calling conventions in use.
               Shrink wrapping generalizes leaf-routine optimization to apply to routines that
         are not leaves in the call graph. The idea behind it is to move the procedure prologue
         and epilogue code along the control-flow paths within a procedure until they either
         “ run into” each other and, hence, can be removed or until they surround a region
         containing one or more calls and so enclose the minimal part of the procedure that
         still allows it to function correctly and efficiently.


15.4.1   Leaf-Routine Optimization
         At first glance, it may seem surprising that a high percentage of the procedures in
         many programs are leaf routines. On the other hand, reasoning from some simple
         cases suggests that this should be so. In particular, consider a program whose call
         graph is a binary tree, i.e., a tree in which each node has either zero or two succes­
         sors. It is not hard to show by induction that the number of leaves in such a tree is
         one more than the number of non-leaves, hence over half the procedures in such a
         call graph are leaf routines. Of course, this ratio does not hold universally: trees with
         more than two successors per node increase the ratio, while call graphs that are not
         trees or that include recursive routines may reduce the ratio to zero.
              Thus, optimizations that lower the overhead of calling leaf routines are often
         highly desirable and, as we shall see, require relatively little effort. Determining the
         applicability of leaf-routine optimization has two main components. The first is the
         obvious one—that the routine calls no others. The second is architecture-dependent
         and requires somewhat more effort. We must determine how much storage, both
         registers and stack space, the procedure requires. If it requires no more registers
         than are available as caller-saved and short-term scratch registers, then its register
         usage can be adjusted to use those registers. For an architecture without register
         windows, this number is set by software convention or by an interprocedural register
         allocator (see Section 19.6) and can be done in such a way as to favor leaf-routine
         optimization. For sparc , with register-window saving and restoring done by separate
         instructions than procedure calls and returns, it merely requires that the called
         procedure not contain save and r e s to r e instructions and that it be restricted to
         using registers in the caller’s out register set and scratch globals.
              Section 15.4     Leaf-Routine Optimization and Shrink Wrapping                        473

                   If the leaf routine also requires no stack space, because, for example, it does not
              manipulate any local arrays that need to have their elements be addressable, and if
              it has sufficient storage for its scalars in the available registers, then the code that
              creates and reclaims a stack frame for the leaf routine is also not needed.
                   If a leaf routine is small or is called from only a few places, it may be an excellent
              candidate for procedure integration.

15.4.2        Shrink Wrapping
              The definition of shrink wrapping given above is not quite accurate. If we were to
              move the prologue and epilogue code to enclose the minimal possible code segments
              that include calls or that otherwise need to use callee-saved registers, we might end
              up placing that code inside a loop or making many copies of it for distinct control-
              flow paths. Both would be wasteful—the former of time and the latter of space and
              usually time as well. The latter might also be incorrect. Consider the flowgraph in
              Figure 15.8. If blocks B3 and B4 need to use a callee-saved register for variable a, we
              might be led to place a register save before each of those blocks and a restore after
              block B4. If we did that and the execution path included both B3 and B4, we would
              save the wrong value on entry to B4.
                   Instead, our goal is to move the prologue and epilogue code to enclose the
              minimal code segments that need them, subject to their not being contained in a loop
              and not creating the problem just described. To do so, we use a data-flow analysis
              developed by Chow [Chow88] that uses properties similar to some of those used in
              the analysis carried out for partial-redundancy elimination. For a basic block /, we
              define RUSE(i) to be the set of registers used or defined in block /. Next, we define
              two data-flow properties called register anticipatability and register availability. A
              register is anticipatable at a point in a flowgraph if all execution paths from that
              point contain definitions or uses of the register; it is available if all execution paths
              to that point include definitions or uses of it (see Section 13.3 for use of similar
              properties in the context of partial-redundancy elimination). We use RANTin(i),
              RANTout(i), RAVin(i), and RAVout(i) to denote the data-flow attributes on entry
              to and exit from each block i. Thus, we have the data-flow equations




  FIG. 15.8 Incorrect placement of save and restore code for the register allocated for variable c.
474   Procedure Optimizations


            RANTout(i) =               RANTin(j)
                           jeSucc(i)

            RANTin(i) = RUSE(i) U RANTout(i)
      and
            RAVin(i) =     |^|       RAVout(j)
                         jePred(i)

            RAVout(i) = RUSE(i) U RAVin(i)
      with the initialization RANTout(exi t ) = RAVm(entry) = 0. Note that these sets
      can be represented by bit vectors that are a single word each for a machine with at
      most 32 registers.
           The idea is to insert register-saving code where a use is anticipatable and to insert
      restore code where a use is available. Note that the two issues are symmetric, since
      the data-flow equations are mirror images of each other, as are the conditions for
      save and restore insertion. Thus, determining the appropriate data-flow equations
      for saving automatically gives us the corresponding equations for restoring. We
      choose to insert save code for a register r at basic-block entries and at the earliest
      point leading to one or more contiguous blocks that use r. For block i to satisfy this,
      we must have r e RANTin(i) and r $ RANTin(j) for / e Pred(i). Also, there must be
      no previous save of r, because introducing another one saves the wrong value, so
      r & RAVin(i). Thus, the analysis suggests that the set of registers to be saved on entry
      to block i is
            SAVE(i) = (RANTin(i) - RAVin(i)) n        p|       (REGS - RANTin(j))
                                                   jePred(i)

      where REGS is the set all of registers and, by symmetry, the set of registers to be
      restored on exit from block i is
            RSTR(i) = (RAVout(i) —RANTout(i)) D            P|    (REGS —RAVout(j))
                                                       jeSucc(i)

           However, these choices of save and restore points suffer from two problems.
      One is the issue covered by the example in Figure 15.8 and the mirror image for
      restoring. We handle this by splitting the edge from block B2 to B4 and placing the
      register save currently at the entry to B4 in the new (empty) block; we deal with
      restores in the corresponding fashion. The second problem is that this choice of save
      and restore points does not deal efficiently with the issue of saving and restoring
      being needed around a subgraph nested inside a loop. We handle this by recognizing
      from the control-flow structure of the routine being compiled that such a subgraph is
      nested inside a loop and we migrate the save and restore code outward to surround
      the loop.
           As an example of this approach, consider the flowgraph in Figure 15.9. Assume
      that r l through r7 are used to hold parameters and r8 through r l5 are callee-saved
      registers. Then the values of R U S E () are as follows:
            RUSE(e ntry)    = 0
            RUSE( Bl)       = {r2}
           Section 15.4    Leaf-Routine O ptim ization and Shrink W rapping                475




                              exit

FIG. 15.9 A lir flowgraph example for shrink wrapping.


               RUSE(B2)           = {rl}
               RUSE(B3)                     = {rl,r2,r8}
               RUSE(B4)           = {rl,r2}
               RUSE(ex it) = 0
           The values of RANTin(), RANTout(), RAVin(), and RAVout() are as follows:
               RANTin(entry) = {rl,r2}               RANTout(entry) —{rl,r2}
               RANTin(Bl)           = (rl,r2)        RANTout( Bl)          {rl,r2}
               RANTin(B2)           = (rl,r2)        RANTout( B2)          {rl,r2}
               RANTin(B3)           = {rl,r2,r8}     RANTout( B3)       = {rl,r2}
               RANTin(B4)           = (rl,r2)        RANTout( B4)          0
               RANTin(exit) = 0                      RANTout(ex it) = 0
               RAVin(entry) = 0                 RAVout(entry) = 0
               RAVin(Bl)          = 0           RAVout{B\)       = |r2)
               RAVin(B2)          = {r2}        RAVout(B2)       = (rl,r2)
               RAVin{B3)          = {r2}        RAVout(B3)       = {rl,r2,r8}
               RAVin(BA)          = {rl,r2}     RAVo«?(B4)       = {rl,r2}
               RAVin(ex it) = {rl.r2} RAVout(exit) ={rl,r2}
           Finally, the values of SAVE() and RSTR() are as follows:
               SAVE(entry) = 0                 RSTR (entry) = 0
               S-AVE(Bl)         = (rl,r2)     RSTR(B1)      =0
               SAVE(B2)          = 0           RSTR(B2)      =0
               SAVE(B3)          = {r8}        RSTR(B3)      = {r8}
               SAVE(BA)          =0            RSTR (B4)     = {rl,r2}
               SAVE(exit) = 0                  RSTR(exit) = 0
           Since rl and r2 are used for parameter passing, the only register of interest here
           is r8, and the values of SAVE( ) and RSTR( ) indicate that we should save r8 at
           the entry to block B3 and restore it at B3’s exit, as we would expect. The resulting
           flowgraph appears in Figure 15.10.
476           Procedure O ptim izations




 FIG. 15.10 The example in Figure 15.9 after shrink wrapping.




15.5          W rap-Up
              In this chapter, we have discussed three pairs of optimizations that apply to whole
              procedures and that, except in one case, do not require data-flow analysis to be
              effective. The pairs of optimizations are as follows:


         1.   Tail-recursion elimination and the more general tail-call optimization turn calls into
              branches. M ore specifically, tail-recursion elimination recognizes calls in a proce­
              dure that recursively call the same procedure and that do nothing but return after
              returning from the call. Such a call can always be turned into code that copies the
              arguments to the parameter locations followed by a branch to the beginning of the
              body of the routine.
                   Tail-call optimization deals with the same situation, except that the called rou­
              tine need not be the caller. This optimization does the same thing as tail-recursion
              elimination, except that it needs to be done more carefully, since the called routine
              may not even be in the same compilation unit. To do it, we need to know where the
              called routine expects to find its parameters, how big its stack frame is, and where
              to branch to in order to begin executing it.
         2.   Procedure integration and in-line expansion are generally used as two names for
              the same optimization, namely, replacing a call by the body of the called routine.
              In this book, however, we use them to denote distinct versions of this operation:
              procedure integration is done early in the compilation process to take advantage
              o f the many optimizations that have single procedures as their scopes (for example,
              integrating a procedure whose body is a loop and that is called in the body of a loop),
              while in-line expansion is done late in the compilation process to take advantage of
              low-level operations that have particularly effective implementations in a particular
              architecture.
             Section 15.5     Wrap-Up                                                             477




FIG. 15.11   Place of procedure optimizations (in bold type) in an aggressive optimizing compiler.
             (continued)

        3.   Leaf-routine optim ization takes advan tage o f the fact that a large fraction o f p roce­
             dure calls are to routines that are leaves, i.e., that m ake no calls themselves and hence
             do not generally need the full b aggage (stack fram e, register saving and restoring,
             etc.) o f an arbitrary routine. Shrink w rappin g generalizes this by, in effect, m igrat­
             ing entry-point code forw ard and exit-point code b ackw ard along the control-flow
             paths in a procedure so that they annihilate each other if they collide. A s a result,
             som e control-flow path s through a shrink-w rapped routine m ay include full entry
             and exit code and others m ay not.

                  Figure 15.11 show s in bold type where these optim izations are generally placed
             in the order o f optim izations.
478             Procedure O ptim izations


                                                                          (to constant folding, algebraic
                                                                        simplifications, and reassociation)




 F IG . 15.11   ( c o n t in u e d )




15.6            Further R eading
                The Linpack benchmark is described by Dongarra et al. in [DonB79]. The Cooper,
                Hall, and Torczon experiment with procedure integration described in Section 15.2
                is found in [CooH 92].
                     Chow ’s approach to shrink wrapping is described in [Chow88].



15.7            Exercises
         15.1   In doing tail-call optimization, how can we guarantee that there is enough stack
                space for the callee? (a) Under what conditions can this be done during compilation?
                (b) Would splitting the work between compiling and linking simplify it or make it
                more widely applicable? If so, explain how. If not, explain why not.

  ADV 15.2 (a) Generalize tail-call optimization to discover groups of routines that form a
           recursive loop, i.e., for routines r i through r * , r \ calls only r 2 , r i calls only r 3 , . . . ,
           and r£ calls only r i . (b) Under what conditions can the routines’ bodies be combined
           into a single one and how would you determine whether the conditions hold?
      Section 15.7      Exercises                                                             479

15.3 In doing leaf-routine optimization, how can we be sure that there is enough stack
     space for all the leaf procedures? (a) Under what conditions can this be done during
     compilation? (b) Would splitting the work between compiling and linking simplify
     it or make it more widely applicable? If so, explain how. If not, explain why not.
15.4 Design a compact format for saving the m i r and symbol table generated for a
     compilation unit to enable cross-compilation-unit procedure integration. Assume
     that all the compilation units result from compiling modules in the same source
     language.
15.5 Write an i c a n routine that performs inlining on l i r code, following the conventions
     given in Section 15.3. As part of this exercise, design an i c a n data structure to
     represent template files and read one into the appropriate structure by the call
     re a d .tem p la tes (file, struc), where file is the file name of the template file and struc
     is the structure to read it into.
15.6 Write an i c a n procedure to do leaf-routine optimization on l i r code, assuming that
     parameters are passed in registers r l through r 6 and that r7 through r 13 are saved
     by the caller. Make sure to check whether stack space is required and to allocate it
     only if it is.
15.7 Write an i c a n routine
           Tail_Call_Opt( e n l , n l ,ninstl,LBlockl,^«2,«2,ninst2,LBlock2)
      that takes two l i r procedures such that the first one performs a tail call to the second
      one and modifies their code to replace the tail call by a branch. Assume that the first
      routine passes nargs arguments to the second one in a sequence of registers beginning
      with r l , that the frame and stack pointers are register r20 and r21, respectively, and
      that enl and enl are the numbers of the entry blocks of the two procedures.
                                                                 CHAPTER 16



                          Register Allocation




I
     n this chapter, we cover register allocation and assignment, which are, for almost
     all architectures, among the most important of optimizations. The problem
     addressed is how to minimize traffic between the CPU registers, which are
     usually few and fast to access, and whatever lies beyond them in the memory
hierarchy, including one or more levels of cache and main memory, all of which
are slower to access and larger, generally increasing in size and decreasing in speed
the further we move away from the registers.
     Register allocation is best carried out on low-level intermediate code or on
assembly language, because it is essential that all loads from and stores to memory,
including their address computations, be represented explicitly.
     We begin with a discussion of a quick and reasonably effective local method that
depends on usage counts and loop nesting. Next comes a detailed presentation of a
much more effective approach that uses graph coloring to do global allocation and
a short overview of another approach that also uses graph coloring but that is not
generally as effective. We also mention briefly an approach that views allocation as
a bin-packing problem and three approaches that use a procedure’s control tree to
guide allocation.
     The central focus of the chapter, global register allocation by graph coloring,
usually results in very effective allocations without a major cost in compilation
speed. It views the fact that two quantities must be in registers at the same time as
excluding them from being in the same register. It represents the quantities by nodes
in a graph and the exclusions (called interferences) by arcs between the correspond­
ing nodes; the nodes may represent real registers also, and the arcs may represent
exclusions such as that the base address in a memory access may not be register rO.
Given the graph corresponding to an entire procedure, this method then attempts
to color the nodes, with the number of colors equal to the number of available real
registers, so that every node is assigned a color that is distinct from those of all the
nodes adjacent to it. If this cannot be achieved, additional code is introduced to store

                                                                               481
482    Register Allocation


       quantities to memory and to reload them as needed, and the process is repeated un­
       til a satisfactory coloring is achieved. As we will see, even very simple formulations
       of graph-coloring problems are NP-complete, so one of the most important facets
       of making global register allocation as effective as possible is using highly effective
       heuristics.
             Further coverage of register allocation appears in Section 19.6, where interpro­
       cedural methods are discussed. Some of these methods work on code below the
       assembly-language level, namely, on relocatable object modules annotated with in­
       formation about data usage patterns.




16.1   Register Allocation and Assignment
       Register allocation determines which of the values (variables, temporaries, and large
       constants) that might profitably be in a machine’s registers should be in registers at
       each point in the execution of a program. Register allocation is important because
       registers are almost always a scarce resource—there are rarely enough of them to
       hold all the objects one would like to keep in them—and because, in R i s e systems, al­
       most all operations other than data movement operate entirely on register contents,
       not storage, and in modern cisc implementations, the register-to-register operations
       are significantly faster than those that take one or two memory operands. Graph col­
       oring is a highly effective approach to global (intraprocedural) register allocation.
       We also describe briefly a related method called priority-based graph coloring. In
       Section 19.6, we discuss interprocedural approaches that work on whole programs
       at compile time or link time.
            Register assignment determines which register each allocated value should be in.
       Register assignment is mostly trivial for a R i s e architecture, since the registers are ei­
       ther uniform or divided into two nearly uniform sets—the general or integer registers
       and the floating-point registers—and the operations that can be performed in them
       are mutually exclusive or very nearly so. One sometimes significant exception is that
       generally either set of registers can be used to hold word- or doubleword-size values
       that are being copied from one area of memory to another, and the choice of which
       set to use may depend on what else is occupying registers at the same time. A second
       exception is that doubleword quantities are usually restricted to even-odd pairs of
       registers on 32-bit systems, so some care is needed to ensure that they are assigned
       correctly. For ciscs, register assignment must typically take into account special uses
       for some of the registers, such as serving as the stack pointer or being used implicitly
       by string-manipulation instructions, as occurs in the Intel 386 architecture family.
            In a compiler that does global optimization on medium-level intermediate code,
       register allocation is almost invariably done after generating low-level or machine
       code. It is preceded by instruction scheduling (see Section 17.1) and possibly by
       software pipelining (see Section 17.4), and possibly followed by another pass of
       instruction scheduling. In a compiler that does global optimization on low-level
       intermediate code, register allocation is frequently among the last few optimizations
       done. In either approach, it is essential to expose all addressing calculations, such as
       Section 16.2      Local Methods                                                              483


       for accessing array elements, before register allocation, so that their use of registers
       can be taken into account in the allocation process.
            If allocation is done on medium-level intermediate code, it is usually necessary
       for a few registers to be reserved for the code generator to use as temporaries for
       quantities that are not allocated to registers and for some of the more complex
       constructs such as switches. This is a distinct drawback of the priority-based graph­
       coloring approach (Section 16.4), since it restricts the reserved registers to being used
       for the designated purposes, generally without knowing in advance how many are
       actually required; thus the maximum number of registers that may be needed must
       be reserved, which reduces the number of registers available to the allocator.
            Before proceeding to the discussion of global register allocation, we consider
       what kinds of objects should be taken as candidates for allocation to registers and
       briefly describe two older, local approaches, the first developed by Freiburghouse
       [Frei74] and the second used in the PDP-11 bliss compiler and its descendants, in­
       cluding the DEC GEM compilers discussed in Section 21.3.2. In many architectures,
       including all Rises, all operations are performed between registers, and even storage-
       to-storage moves of objects are done by loading them into registers and then storing
       them, so it would appear at first glance that every object should be considered as a
       candidate. This is not quite true—input/output is universally done to and from mem­
       ory, not registers, and communication between the processors in a shared-memory
       multiprocessor is almost entirely through memory as well. Also, small constants that
       can fit into the immediate fields of instructions generally should not be taken as can­
       didates, since they can be used more efficiently that way than by occupying registers.
       Virtually all other classes of objects should be considered candidates for register allo­
       cation: local variables, nonlocal variables, constants too large to fit into immediate
       fields, temporaries, etc. Even individual array elements should be considered (see
       Section 20.3).



16.2   Local Methods
       The first local allocation approach is hierarchical in that it weights inner loops more
       heavily than outer ones and more heavily than code not contained in loops, on the
       principle that most programs spend most of their time executing loops. The idea is to
       determine, either heuristically or from profiling information, the allocation benefits
       of the various allocatable quantities. If profiling information is not available, it is
       generally estimated by multiplying the savings that result from allocating a variable
       to a register by a factor based on its loop nesting depth, usually \QdePth for depth
       loops.1 In addition, liveness of a variable on entry to or exit from a basic block
       should be taken into account, since a live quantity needs to be stored on exit from
       a block, unless there are enough registers available to assign one to it. We define the
       following quantities:


       1. Some compilers use Sdepth simply because a multiplication by 8 can be done in a single cycle by
       a left shift.
484        Register Allocation


      1.   Idcost is the execution-time cost of a load instruction in the target machine.
      2.   stcost is the cost of a store instruction.
      3.   mvcost is the cost of a register-to-register move instruction.
      4.   usesave is the savings for each use of a variable that resides in a register rather than
           a memory location.
      5.   defsave is the savings for each assignment to a variable that resides in a register rather
           than a memory location.
           Then the net savings in execution time for a particular variable v each time basic
           block Bz is executed is netsave(v, z), defined as follows:

                netsave(v,i) = u • usesave + d • defsave —l • Idcost —s • stcost

           where u and d are the numbers of uses and definitions of variable v, respectively, in
           block z; and / and s = 0 or 1, counting whether a load of t/ at the beginning of the
           block or a store at the end, respectively, is needed.
               Thus, if L is a loop and z ranges over the basic blocks in it, then

                1 0 depth m   ^         netsavefvj)
                          ieblocks(L)

           is a reasonable estimate of the benefit of allocating v to a register in loop L.2 Given
           that one has R registers to allocate—which is almost always fewer than the total
           number of registers, since some must be reserved for procedure linkage, short-term
           temporaries, etc.—after computing such estimates, one simply allocates the R objects
           with the greatest estimated benefit to registers in each loop or loop nest. Following
           register allocation for the loop nests, allocation is done for code outside loops using
           the same benefit measure.
                We can sometimes improve the allocation by taking into account the P prede­
           cessors and S successors of a block z. If those blocks all assign variable v to the same
           location, the values of / and s for the variable for this block are both 0. In consid­
           ering the predecessors and successors along with block z, we may put variable v in
           a different register from the one it is allocated to in some or all of the surrounding
           blocks. If so, we incur an additional cost for this variable of at most (P + S) • mvcost,
           the cost of one move for each predecessor and successor block.
                This approach is simple to implement, often works remarkably well, and was
           the prevalent approach in optimizing compilers, such as IBM’s Fortran H for the
           IBM 360 and 370 series machines, until the global methods described below became
           feasible for production use.
                The bliss optimizing compiler for the PDP-11 views register allocation as a bin­
           packing problem. It determines the lifetimes of temporaries and then divides them
           into four groups according to whether they


           2. This measure can be refined to weight conditionally executed code in proportion to its expected
           or measured execution frequency.
              Section 16.3     Graph Coloring                                                        485


         1.   must be allocated to a specific register,
         2.   must be allocated to some register,
         3.   may be allocated to a register or memory, or
         4.   must be allocated to a memory location.
              Next, it ranks the allocatable temporaries by a cost measure for allocation to specific
              registers or any register, and finally it tries a series of permutations of the packing
              of temporaries into the registers and memory locations, preferring to allocate to
              registers when possible. An approach derived from this one is still used in Digital
              Equipment’s GEM compilers for Alpha (Section 21.3).


16.3          Graph Coloring
16.3.1        Overview of Register Allocation by Graph Coloring
              That global register allocation could be viewed as a graph-coloring problem was rec­
              ognized by John Cocke as long ago as 1971, but no such allocator was designed and
              implemented until Chaitin’s in 1981. That allocator was for an experimental IBM
              370 PL/I compiler, and it was soon adapted by Chaitin and a group of colleagues for
              the PL.8 compiler for the IBM 801 experimental R i s e system. Versions of it and al­
              locators derived from it have been used since in many compilers. The generally most
              successful design for one was developed by Briggs, and it is his design on which much
              of the rest of this chapter is based. (See Sectionl6.7 for further reading.)
                   The basic idea of global register allocation by graph coloring can be expressed
              in five steps, as follows (although each of steps 2 through 4 is an oversimplification):
         1.   During code generation or optimization (whichever phase precedes register alloca­
              tion) or as the first stage of register allocation, allocate objects that can be assigned to
              registers to distinct symbolic registers, say, s i , s2, . . . , using as many as are needed
              to hold all the objects (source variables, temporaries, large constants, etc.).
         2.   Determine what objects should be candidates for allocation to registers. (This could
              simply be the s /, but there is a better choice described in Section 16.3.3.)
         3.   Construct a so-called interference graph whose nodes represent allocatable objects
              and the target machine’s real registers and whose arcs (i.e., undirected edges) repre­
              sent interferences, where two allocatable objects interfere if they are simultaneously
              live and an object and a register interfere if the object cannot be or should not be
              allocated to that register (e.g., an integer operand and a floating-point register).
         4.   Color the interference graph’s nodes with R colors, where R is the number of
              available registers, so that any two adjacent nodes have different colors (this is called
              an R-coloring).
         5.   Allocate each object to the register that has the same color it does.
                 Before we proceed with the details, we give an example of the basic approach.
              Suppose we have the simple code shown in Figure 16.1(a) with y and w dead at the
486            Register Allocation


               1          x <- 2                 si <- 2                   rl <- 2
               2          y <- 4                 s2 <- 4                   r2 <- 4
               3          w <- x + y             s3    si   + s2           r3 <- rl + r2
               4          z <- x + 1             s4    si   +1             r3 <- rl + 1
               5          u <- x * y             s5    si   * s2           rl <- rl * r2
               6          x <- z * 2             s6    s4   *2             r2 <- r3 * 2
                          (a)                    (b)                        (c)
  FIG. 16.1 (a) A simple example for register allocation by graph coloring; (b) a symbolic register
            assignment for it; and (c) an allocation for it with three registers, assuming that y and w
            are dead on exit from this code.




  FIG. 16.2 Interference graph for code in Figure 16.1(b).

               end of the code sequence, three registers (rl, r2, and r3) available, and suppose
               further that z must not occupy rl. We first assign symbolic registers si, ... , s6
               to the variables, as shown in Figure 16.1(b). Note that the two definitions of x in
               lines 1 and 6 have been assigned different symbolic registers, as described in the
               next section. Then, for example, si interferes with s2 because s2 is defined in line 2,
               between the definition of si in line 1 and its uses in lines 3 ,4 , and 5; and s4 interferes
               with rl because z is restricted to not being in rl. The resulting interference graph is
               shown in Figure 16.2. It can be colored with three colors (the number of registers)
               by making s3, s4, and r3 red; si, s5, and rl blue; and s2, s6, and r2 green. Thus,
               putting both si and s5 in rl, s2 and s6 in r2, and s3 and s4 in r3 is a valid register
               assignment (shown in Figure 16.1(c)), as the reader can easily check.
                    Next, we consider the details of the method and how they differ from the outline
               sketched above.

16.3.2         Top-Level Structure
               The list of global type definitions and data structures used in register allocation by
               graph coloring is given in Figure 16.3. Each is described where it is first used.
                   The overall structure of the register allocator is shown in Figure 16.4. The
               allocation process proceeds as follows:
          1.   First Make_Webs( ) combines du-chains that intersect (i.e., that contain a use in
               common) to form webs, which are the objects for which registers are allocated. A
               web is a maximal union of du-chains such that, for each definition d and use u, either
               u is in the du-chain of d or there exist d = do, . . . , uq, dn, un = w, such that, for each
               i, Uj is in the du-chains of both di and dj+i. Each web is assigned a distinct symbolic
               register number. Make_Webs( ) also calls MIR_to_SymLIR( ) to translate the input
               mir code in Block to lir with symbolic registers that is stored in LBlock; note that
               this is not essential—the code input to the register allocator could just as easily be in
            Section 16.3     Graph Coloring                                                         487

            Symbol * Var u Register u Const
            UdDu = integer x integer
            UdDuChain = (Symbol x UdDu) —> set of UdDu
            webrecord = record {symb: Symbol,
                                defs: set of UdDu,
                                uses: set of UdDu,
                                spill: boolean,
                                sreg: Register,
                                disp: integer}
            listrecd = record {nints, color, disp: integer,
                                spcost: real,
                                adjnds, rmvadj: sequence of integer}
            opdrecd = record {kind: enum {var,regno,const},
                              val: Symbol}

            DefWt, UseWt, CopyWt: real
            nregs, nwebs, BaseReg, Disp := InitDisp, ArgReg: integer
            RetReg: Register
            Symreg: array [••] of webrecord
            AdjMtx: array [•*,*•] of boolean
            AdjLsts: array [••] of listrecd
            Stack: sequence of integer
            Real_Reg: integer — > integer

FIG. 16.3   Global type definitions and data structures used in register allocation by graph coloring.

            lir and, if we do other low-level optimizations before register allocation, it definitely
            will be in lir or some other low-level code form.
       2.   Next, Build_A djM tx( ) builds the adjacency-matrix representation of the inter­
            ference graph, which is a two-dimensional, lower-triangular matrix such that
            AdjMtx [/,/] is tr u e if and only if there is an arc between (real or symbolic) registers
            i and / (for i > /), and f a l s e otherwise.
       3.   Next, the routine C o a le sc e_ R e g s( ) uses the adjacency matrix to coalesce registers,
            i.e., it searches for copy instructions si       sj such that si and sj do not interfere with
            each other and it replaces uses of sj with uses of s/, eliminating sj from the code.
            If any coalescences are performed, we continue with step 1 above; otherwise, we
            continue to the next step.
       4.   Next, B u ild _ A d jL sts( ) constructs the adjacency-list representation of the inter­
            ference graph, which is an array A d jL sts [1 “ nwebs] of l i s t r e c d records, one for
            each symbolic register. The records consist of six components: c o lo r, d is p , s p c o st,
            n in ts , ad jn d s, and rm vadj; these components indicate whether a node has been
            colored yet and with what color, the displacement to be used in spilling it (if neces­
            sary), the spill cost associated with it, the number of adjacent nodes left in the graph,
            the list of adjacent nodes left in the graph, and the list of adjacent nodes that have
            been removed from the graph, respectively.
       5.   Next, C o m p u te_ S p ill_ C o sts( ) computes, for each symbolic register, the cost of
            spilling it to memory and restoring it to a register. As we shall see below, there
488            Register Allocation

               procedure Allocate_Registers(DuChains,nblocks,ninsts,Block,
                   LBlock,Succ,Pred)
                   DuChains: in set of UdDuChain
                  nblocks: in integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
                  Block: in array [1**nblocks] of array of MIRInst
                   LBlock: out array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst
                   Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
               begin
                   success, coalesce: boolean
                   repeat
                      repeat
                          Make_Webs(DuChains,nblocks,ninsts,Block,LBlock)
                          Build_AdjMtx( )
                          coalesce := Coalesce_Regs(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock,Succ,Pred)
                      until !coalesce
                      Build_AdjLsts( )
                      Compute_Spill_Costs(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                      Prune_Graph( )
                      success := Assign_Regs( )
                      if success then
                          Modify_Code(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                      else
                          Gen_Spill_Code(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                      fi
                  until success
               end      || Allocate_Registers

  FIG. 16.4 Top level of graph-coloring register-allocation algorithm.


               are some types of register contents (such as large constants) that may be handled
               differently, in ways that are less expensive and that still achieve the effect of spilling
               and restoring.
         6.    Then Prune_Graph( ) uses two approaches, called the degree < R rule and the
               optim istic heuristic , to remove nodes (and their associated arcs) from the adjacency-
               list representation of the interference graph.
          7.   Then Assign_Regs( ) uses the adjacency lists to try to assign colors to the nodes so
               that no two adjacent nodes have the same color. If it succeeds, Modif y_Code( ) is
               called to replace each use of a symbolic register with the real register that has been
               assigned the same color and the allocation process terminates. If register assignment
               fails, it proceeds to the next step.
          8.   The routine Gen_Spill_Code( ) assigns stack locations for symbolic registers to be
               spilled to memory and then inserts spills and restores for them (or handles them
               alternatively, such as for the large-constant case mentioned above, for which it is
               generally less expensive to reconstruct or rem aterialize a value, rather than storing
               and loading it). Then control returns to step 1 above.
             Section 16.3         Graph Coloring                                                  489




  FIG. 16.5 An example of webs. The most complex web is shaded.

                 The following sections elaborate each of the routines discussed above and the
             reasons for taking this approach.


16.3.3       Webs, the Allocatable Objects
             The first issue is determining what objects should be candidates for register alloca­
             tion. Rather than simply using the variables that fit into a register, the candidates
             are objects that were originally called names but that now are generally called webs.
             A web is as defined in item 1 in Section 16.3.2. For example, in the code in Fig­
             ure 16.1(a), the definition of x in line 1 and its uses in lines 3, 4, and 5 belong to the
             same web, since the definition reaches all the uses listed, but the definition of x in
             line 6 belongs to a different web.
                  For another example, consider the abstracted flowgraph fragment in Figure 16.5
             in which we show just definitions and uses of two variables, x and y, and we assume
             that there are no loops enclosing the fragment. There are four webs present. One
             consists of the union of the du-chain for the definition of x in block B2, which is
             shaded in the figure and includes the uses of x in blocks B4 and B5, and the du-chain
             for the definition of x in block B3, which is also shaded and includes the use of x in
             block B5; since they intersect in the use of x in block B5, they are combined to form
             one web. The definition of x in block B5 and its use in block B6 form a separate web.
             In summary, the four webs are as follows:

                 Web        Components

                 wl         def    x in B2, def x in B3, use x in B4, use x in B5
                 w2         def    x in B5, use x in B6
                 w3         def    y in B2, use y in B4
                 w4         def    y in Bl, use y in B3
490           R egister A llocation




  FIG. 16.6 Interferences among the webs in Figure 16.5.

             and the interferences among them are as indicated in Figure 16.6. In general, to
             determine the webs for a procedure, we first construct its du-chains by computing
             reaching definitions and then we compute the maximal unions of intersecting du-
             chains (two du-chains intersect if they have a use in common).
                  The advantage of using webs instead of variables as the candidates for allocation
             to registers results from the fact that the same variable name may be used repeatedly
             in a routine for unrelated purposes. The classic example of this is the use of i as
             a loop index. For many programmers, it is the first choice of a variable to use
             as a loop index, and it is often used for many loops in the same routine. If they
             were all required to use the same register for i, the allocation would be unduly
             constrained. In addition, of course, there may be multiple uses of a variable name
             for purposes the programmer thinks of as identical but that are in fact separable
             for register allocation because their webs are distinct. Using webs also obviates the
             need to map the variables to symbolic registers: each web is equivalent to a symbolic
             register. Notice that for a Rise system, this can be made to encompass large constants
             in addition to variables— to be used, a large constant needs to be loaded into or
             constructed in a register and the register then becomes an element of a web.
                  The ican routine Make_Webs( ) shown in Figure 16.7 constructs the webs for a
             procedure, given its du-chains. It uses three global data types. One is UdDu, whose
             members consist of pairs </, />, where i is a basic block number and / is an instruction
             number within the block.
                  The second type, UdDuChain = (Symbol x UdDu) — > s e t o f UdDu, represents
             du-chains. As noted in Section 2.7.9, an ican function with two arguments is equiv­
             alent to a set of triples whose type is the product of the types of the first argument,
             the second argument, and the range. We use that equivalence here— we write a mem­
             ber sdu of the type UdDuChain as a set of triples of the form < s,p , Q> (where s is a
             symbol, p is a block-position pair, and Q is a set of block-position pairs), rather than
             in the form s d u ( s ,p ) = Q.
                  The third type w ebrecord describes a web, which consists of a symbol name, a
             set of definitions of the symbol, a set of uses of the same symbol, a Boolean indicating


             procedure Make_Webs(DuChains,nblocks,ninsts,Block,LBlock)
                 DuChains: in set of UdDuChain
                 nblocks: in integer
                 ninsts: in array [1••nblocks] of integer
                 Block: in array [1 ••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                 LBlock: out array [1••nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst

  FIG. 16.7 The routine Make_Webs( ) to determine webs for register allocation by graph coloring.
           Section 16.3   Graph Coloring                                491


           begin
               Webs := 0, Tmpl, Tmp2: set of webrecord
               webl, web2: webrecord
               sdu: Symbol x UdDu — > set of UdDu
               i, oldnwebs: integer
               nwebs := nregs
               for each sdu e DuChains do
                    nwebs += 1
                    Webs u= {<symb:sdu@l,defs:{sdu@2},uses:sdu@3,
                        spill:false,sreg:nil,disp:nil)}
               od
               repeat
                    I| combine du-chains for the same symbol and that
                    I| have a use in common to make webs
                    oldnwebs := nwebs
                    Tmpl := Webs
                    while Tmpl * 0 do
                        webl := ♦Tmpl; Tmpl -= {webl}
                        Tmp2 := Tmpl
                        while Tmp2 * 0 do
                            web2 := ♦Tmp2; Tmp2 -= {web2}
                            if webl.symb = web2.symb &
                                 (webl.uses n web2.uses) * 0 then
                                 webl.defs u= web2.defs
                                 webl.uses u= web2.uses
                                 Webs -= {web2}
                                 nwebs -= 1
                            fi
                        od
                    od
               until oldnwebs = nwebs
               for i := 1 to nregs do
                    Symreg[i] := {<symb:Int_to_Reg(i),defs:nil,
                        uses:nil,spill:false,sreg:nil,disp:nil)}
               od
               I| assign symbolic register numbers to webs
               i := nregs
               for each webl e Webs do
                    i += 1
                    SymregCi] := webl
                    webl.sreg := i
               od
               MIR_to_SymLIR(nblocks,ninsts,Block,LBlock)
           end     II Make_Webs

FIG. 16.7 (continued)
492           R egister A llocation




  FIG. 16.8 Each SSA-form variable is the head of a du-chain.


             whether it is a candidate for spilling, a symbolic register or n i l , and a displacement
             or n i l .
                  We assume that a du-chain is represented as a triple consisting of a symbol,
             a definition of the symbol, and a set of uses of the same symbol, and we assume
             that each definition and use is a pair consisting of a basic-block number and an
             instruction number (within the block), i.e., the compiler-specific type UdDu defined
             in Figure 16.3.
                  The values of the global variables n re g s and nwebs are the number of real
             registers available for allocation, which are assumed to be numbered 1 through
             n re g s, and the number of webs, counting the real registers, respectively.
                  Make.Webs ( ) first initializes the webs from the du-chains and then iterates over
             pairs of webs, checking whether they are for the same symbol and intersect and, if
             so, unioning them. In the process, it counts the webs and, finally, it assigns symbolic
             register names to the webs and calls MIR_to_SymLIR( ) to convert the mir code to
             lir code and to substitute symbolic registers for variables in the code.3
                  Make_Webs( ) uses the routine In t_ to _ R e g (/), which returns the real or sym­
             bolic register name corresponding to integer /. If i < n re g s, it returns the name of
             the /th real register. If i > n re g s, it returns the value of Symregt/] .symb; this case is
             not used here, but is used in the code for MIR_to_SymLIR( ) in Figure 16.9.
                  Note that if the code input to register allocation is in SSA form, then determining
             the webs is easy: each SSA-form variable is a du-chain, since each SSA variable has
             only one definition point. For example, in Figure 16.8, the definition of xi in B l, the
             definition and use of X2 in B2, the definition of X3 , and the uses of xi and X2 in block
             B4 and of X2 and X3 in B5 constitute a web.
                  The ican routine MIR_to_SymLIR( ) in Figure 16.9 converts the mir form of
             a procedure to lir code with symbolic registers in place of variables. The routine
             uses the global type opdrecd, which describes instruction operands, consisting of a
             kin d that is v a r, regno, or co n st and a value that is an identifier, a register, or a
             constant. It uses the global integer constant ArgReg and the global register-valued
             constant RetReg, which contain the number of the first argument register and the
             name of the register for the call to store the return address in, respectively. The code
             also uses three routines, as follows:


              3. This is not essential. The code passed to the register allocator could already be in lir .
            Section 16.3           Graph Coloring                                              493

            procedure MIR_to_SymLIR(nblocks,ninsts,Block,LBlock)
               nblocks: in integer
               ninsts: inout array [1••nblocks] of integer
               Block: in array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
               LBlock: out array [1 “ nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst
            begin
               i, j, k, reg: integer
               inst: MIRInst
               opndl, opnd2, opnd: opdrecd
               for i := 1 to nblocks do
                       j ;= 1
                  while j ^ ninsts[i] do
                     inst := Block[i] [j]
                     case inst of
            binasgn:    opndl := Convert_Opnd(inst.opdl)
                        opnd2 := Convert_Opnd(inst.opd2)
                        LBlock[i][j] := <kind:regbin,left:Find_Symreg(inst.left,i,j),
                           opr:inst.opr,opdl:opndl,opd2:opnd2>
            unasgn:     opnd := Convert_Opnd(inst.opd)
                        LBlock[i][j] := <kind:regun,left:Find.Symreg(inst.left,i,j),
                           opr:inst.opr,opd:opnd)
            valasgn:    opnd := Convert_Opnd(inst.opd)
                        LBlock[i] [j] := <kind:regval,
                           left:Find_Symreg(inst.left,i,j),opd:opnd)

            goto:              LBlock[i][j] := inst
            binif:             opndl :* Convert_0pnd(inst.opdl)
                               opnd2 := Convert_0pnd(inst.opd2)
                               LBlock[i][j] := <kind:regbinif,opr:inst.opr,
                                  opdl:opndl,opd2:opnd2,lbl:inst.lbl)

            call:              reg := ArgReg
                               for k :* 1 to linst.argsl do
                                  LBlock[i][j+k-1] := <kind:regval,
                                      left:Int_to_Reg(reg),
                                      opd:Convert_0pnd(inst.argslk)>
                                  reg +« 1
                               od
                               LBlock[i][j+k] := <kind:callreg,proc:inst.proc,
                                  rreg:RetReg>
                               j +- k

                            esac
                            j += 1
                       od
                  od
            end         I| MIR_to_SymLIR

FIG. 16.9   ican code to convert the mir form of a procedure to lir code with symbolic registers in
            place of variables.
494           Register Allocation


         1.   Find_Sym reg(s,/,/) returns the index of the web (or, equivalently, the symbolic
              register) that symbol s in instruction / in basic block i is part of.
         2.   Convert_0pnd(opnd) takes a mir operand opnd and returns the corresponding
              lir operand (either a constant or a symbolic register, where a symbolic register
              name consists of the letter s concatenated with an integer greater than or equal to
              n regs + 1).
         3.   Int_to_R eg(/) converts its integer argument i to the corresponding real or symbolic
              register name, as described above.

16.3.4        The Interference Graph
              Once the webs have been computed, the next step is to build the interference graph.
              There is one node in the graph for each machine register and one for each web
              (= symbolic register).
                   It might appear that if the registers are homogeneous, i.e., if any quantity may
              reside in any register, then there is no need to include nodes for the registers in the
              interference graph. We would then simply find an R-coloring of the graph and assign
              webs with different colors to distinct registers. However, this is generally not the
              case, since, at the least, the calling conventions and stack structure require registers
              to be reserved for them.
                   Similarly, it might appear that if the target machine has two or more sets of
              registers dedicated to different functions (e.g., integer registers and floating-point
              registers), then the allocation problems for the two sets of registers could be handled
              separately, resulting in smaller, less-constrained interference graphs. However, this
              is generally not the case either, since moving a block of data from one location in
              memory to another (assuming that the architecture lacks memory-to-memory move
              instructions) typically can be done by using either set of registers—so we would
              needlessly restrict the allocation process by using separate graphs.
                   Our simplified description above indicated that two nodes have an arc between
              them if they are ever simultaneously live. However, this can result in many more arcs
              in the graph than are needed. It is sufficient to include an arc between two nodes if
              one of them is live at a definition point of the other. The additional arcs resulting
              from the original definition can significantly increase the number of colors required
              or, equivalently, the amount of code introduced (in a way we have not discussed yet)
              to make the graph R-colorable. The number of arcs connecting a node to others is
              called the node’s degree.
                    Chaitin et al. [ChaA81] give an example of a procedure with an interference
              graph that requires 2 1 colors with the “ simultaneously live” definition and only 11
               with the “ live at a definition point” definition. An adaptation of that example is
               shown in Figure 16.10. On entry to block B4, all of a l , . . . , aw, b l , . . . , bw, and l e f t
               are live. The interference graph has 2n + 1 nodes. If we use the former definition of
               interference, it has n(2n + 1 ) arcs, connecting each node to all the others and needs
               2n + 1 colors. With the latter definition, the ai do not interfere with the hi at all, so
               there are only n{n + 1 ) arcs and only n + 1 colors are required.
                    The interference graph is general enough to represent several sorts of interfer­
               ences other than the ones arising from simultaneously live variables. For example,
             Section 16.3     Graph Coloring                                                           495




 FIG. 16.10 Example flowgraph for which the two definitions of interference produce different
            interference graphs.


             the fact that in the p o w e r architecture, general register rO can be used to hold a
             constant but produces a zero value when used as a base register in an address com­
             putation can be handled by making all webs that represent base registers interfere
             with rO. Similarly, registers that are changed by the language implementation’s call­
             ing conventions can be made to interfere with all webs that are live across a call.


16.3.5       Representing the Interference Graph
             Before describing how to build the interference graph, we consider how best to
             represent it. The graph can be quite large, so space efficiency is a concern; but
             practical experience shows that access time is also a major issue, so careful attention
             to how it is represented can have a large payoff. As we shall see, we need to be able to
             construct the graph, determine whether two nodes are adjacent, find out how many
             nodes are adjacent to a given one, and find all the nodes adjacent to a given node
             quickly. We recommend using the traditional representation, namely, a combination
             of an adjacency matrix and adjacency lists.4
                 The adjacency matrix AdjMtx[2 • *nwebs, 1 • -nwebs- 1 ] is a lower-triangular
             matrix such that AdjMtx[max(/,/’),min ( / ,/)] = tru e if the /th register (real


             4. A representation based on the sparse data structure described by Briggs and Torczon [BriT93]
             and discussed in Section B.l is also a candidate. However, experiments comparing it with the
             traditional approach show that it can be quite wasteful of memory and comparatively slow to
             access as a result.
             R egister A llocation




                    r l r2 r3 s i s2 s3 s4 s5
             r2    "t                             -
             r3     t   t
             si     f   f   f
             s2     f   f   f   t
             s3     f   f   f   t    t
             s4     t   f   f   t    t   f
             s5     f   f   f   f    f   f   t
             s6    -f   f   f   f    f   f   f   f _

FIG. 16.11 Adjacency matrix for the interference graph in Figure 16.2, where t and f stand for
             true and f a ls e , respectively.



             or symbolic) and the /th register are adjacent and is f a l s e otherwise.5 The ma­
             trix representation allows the interference graph to be built quickly and allows one
             to determine quickly whether two nodes are adjacent. For example, the adjacency
             matrix for the interference graph in Figure 16.2 is shown in Figure 16.11, where t
             is used to represent tru e and f to represent f a l s e .
                  The ican routine Build_AdjMtx( ) to build the adjacency-matrix representa­
             tion of the interference graph is given in Figure 16.12. The code uses the function
             Live_At (web, sym b, def) to determine whether there are any definitions in web that
             are live at the definition def of symbol symb and the function In te r fe re (s,r) to de­
             termine whether the web represented by symbolic register s interferes with the real
             register r.
                  The adjacency-lists representation is an array of records of type l i s t r e c d with
             six components each. For array entry A d jL sts [/], the components are as follows:

        1.   co lo r is an integer whose value is the color chosen for the node; it is initially -®.
        2.   d isp is the displacement that forms part of the address at which the symbolic register
             assigned to position i will be spilled, if needed; it is initially
        3.   sp c o st is the spill cost for the node; it is initially 0 . 0 for symbolic registers and 00
             for real registers.
        4.   n in ts is the number of interferences in the adjnds field.
        5.   adjnds is the list of the real and symbolic registers that currently interfere with real
             or symbolic register /.
        6.   rmvadj is the list of the real and symbolic registers that interfered with real or
             symbolic register i and that have been removed from the graph during pruning.



             5. Recall that, in the numbering, the real registers account for positions 1 through nregs and the
             symbolic registers for positions nregs+1 through nwebs.
              Section 16.3     Graph Coloring                                                      497


              procedure Build_AdjMtx( )
              begin
                  i, j : integer
                  def: UdDu
                  for i := 2 to nwebs do
                       for j :s 1 to i-1 do
                           AdjMtx[i,j] := false
                       od
                  od
                  for i := 2 to nregs do
                       for j     1 to i-1 do
                           AdjMtx[i,j] := true
                       od
                  od
                  for i := nregs+1 to nwebs do
                       for j := 1 to nregs do
                           if Interfere(Symreg[i]#j) then
                               AdjMtx[i,j] := true
                           fi
                       od
                       for j := nregs+1 to i-1 do
                           for each def e Symreg[i].defs
                               (Live_At(Symreg[j],Symreg[i].symb.def)) do
                               AdjMtx[i,j] := true
                           od
                       od
                  od
              end     II Build.AdjMtx

 FIG. 16.12   ican code to build the adjacency-matrix representation of the interference graph for
              register allocation by graph coloring.


              This representation is most useful for determining how many nodes are adjacent to
              a particular node and which ones they are. The adjacency lists for the interference
              graph in Figure 16.2 are shown in Figure 16.13.
                   ican code to build the adjacency-lists representation of the interference graph is
              given in Figure 16.14. The adjacency-matrix representation is most useful during the
              preparation for graph coloring, namely, during register coalescing (see next section);
              the adjacency lists are most useful during the actual coloring process. Thus, we build
              the adjacency matrix first, modify it during register coalescing, and then build the
              adjacency lists from the result, as discussed in Section 16.3.2.


16.3.6        Register Coalescing
              After building the adjacency matrix, we apply a transformation known as register
              coalescing to it. Register coalescing or subsumption is a variety of copy propagation
              that eliminates copies from one register to another. It searches the intermediate code
              for register copy instructions, say, sj <- si, such that either si and sj do not interfere
498           Register A llocation


                                                             adjnds
                   color disp spcost nints                1 2          3

              rl      -00        -CO                              r3   s4

              r2                 —00
                                        3 0 l rl r3
              r3      —
                                        3 3 CD lrl r2
              si      —                 0.0 | | 3 | | s2          s3   s4

              s2                 —00    0.0 | | 3 | | si          s3   s4

              s3      -          -      0.0 | | 2 | 1 si          s2

              s4 11         II         110-0 11 I 1 rl si s2 s5
                                                 4            |



              s5Q Q S Q CD
              s6 | -0
                    ° | | -0
                           ° | | 0.0 [ | 0 |

 FIG. 16.13   Initial adjacency lists for the interference graph in Figure 16.2.


              with each other6 or neither si nor sj is stored into between the copy assignment
              and the end of the routine. Upon finding such an instruction, register coalescing
              searches for the instructions that wrote to si and modifies them to put their results
              in sj instead, removes the copy instruction, and modifies the interference graph
              by combining si and sj into a single node that interferes with all the nodes they
              individually interfered with. M odifying the graph can be done incrementally. Note
              that at the point of a copy operation sj <- si, if another symbolic register sk was live
              at that point, we made it interfere with si, which now turns out to be unnecessary,
              so these interferences should be removed.
                   The ican routine C o a le sc e_ R e g s( ) shown in Figure 16.15 performs register
              coalescing. It uses the following three routines:
         1.   R eg_to_In t (r) converts its symbolic or real register argument r to the integer i such
              that Symreg [/] represents r.
         2.   d e l e t e .i n s t ( / ,/ ,n i n s t s ,B l o c k ,S u c c ,P r e d ) deletes instruction/ from basic block
              i (see Figure 4.15).
         3.   N o n _Sto re(L B lo ck ,& ,/ , / , / ) returns tru e if neither symbolic register sk nor si is
              stored into between the assignment sk                 si in LB lockf/] [/] and the end of the
              routine containing that copy assignment.

                   After coalescing registers, we construct the adjacency-lists representation of the
              interference graph, as shown in Figure 16.14.


              6. Notice that the interference graph encodes the data-flow information necessary to do this, so we
              can avoid doing live variables analysis. Also, note that each of si and s j may be either a real or a
              symbolic register.
              Section 16.3    Graph Coloring                                                     49 9


              procedure BuilcLAdjLsts( )
              begin
                  i, j : integer
                  for i := 1 to nregs do
                      AdjLsts[i].nints := 0
                      AdjLsts[i].color := -»
                      AdjLsts[i].disp := -»
                      AdjLsts [i] .spcost 00
                      AdjLsts [i] .adjnds := []
                      AdjLsts [i] .rmvadj := []
                  od
                  for i := nregs+1 to nwebs do
                      AdjLsts[i].nints 0
                      AdjLsts[i].color       -»
                      AdjLsts [i] .disp    -<»
                      AdjLsts [i].spcost := 0.0
                      AdjLsts [i] .adjnds := []
                      AdjLsts [i] .rmvadj := []
                  od
                  for i := 2 to nwebs do
                      for j := 1 to nwebs - 1 do
                           if AdjMtx[i,j] then
                               AdjLsts [i] .adjnds     [j]
                               AdjLsts [j] .adjnds ®= [i]
                               AdjLsts[i].nints += 1
                               AdjLsts [j] .nints += 1
                           fi
                      od
                  od
              end    || Build_AdjLsts

FIG. 16.14 ican code to build the adjacency-lists representation of the interference graph.



                  It has been noted by Chaitin and others that coalescing is a powerful transfor­
              mation. Among the things it can do are the following:

         1.   Coalescing simplifies several steps in the compilation process, such as removing
              unnecessary copies that were introduced by translating from SSA form back to a
              linear intermediate code.
         2.   It can be used to ensure that argument values are moved to (or computed in) the
              proper registers before a procedure call. In the callee, it can migrate parameters
              passed in registers to the proper registers for them to be worked on.
         3.   It enables machine instructions with required source and target registers to have their
              operands and results in the proper places.
         4.   It enables two-address instructions, as found in ciscs, to have their target register
              and the operand that must be in that register handled as required.
500            R e g iste r A llo ca tio n


               procedure Coalesce_Regs(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock,Succ,Pred)
                   nblocks: inout integer
                   ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
                   LBlock: inout array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst
                   Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
               begin
                   i, j, k, 1, p, q: integer
                   for i := 1 to nblocks do
                      for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                          I| if this instruction is a coalescable copy, adjust
                          II assignments to its source to assign to its target instead
                         if LBlock[i][j].kind = regval then
                             k := Reg_to_Int(LBlock[i][j].left)
                             1 := Reg_to_Int(LBlock[i][j].opd.val)
                             if !AdjMtx[max(k,l),min(k,l)] V Non.Store(LBlock,k,l,i,j) then
                                for p := 1 to nblocks do
                                   for q := 1 to ninsts[p] do
                                       if LIR_Has_Left(LBlock[p][q])
                                           & LBlock[p][q].left = LBlock[i][j].opd.val then
                                           LBlock[p][q].left :- LBlock[i][j].left
                                       fi
                                   od
                                od
                                I| remove the copy instruction and combine Symregs
                                delete.inst(i,j ,ninsts,LBlock,Succ,Pred)
                                Symreg[k].defs u= Symreg[l].defs
                                SymregCk].uses u= Symreg[l].uses
                                II adjust adjacency matrix to reflect removal of the copy
                                Symreg[l] := Symreg[nwebs]
                                for p := 1 to nwebs do
                                   if Adj Mtx[max(p,1),min(p,1)] then
                                       Adj Mtx[max(p,k),min(p,k)] := true
                                   fi
                                   Adj Mtx[max(p,1),min(p,1)] := Adj Mtx[nwebs,p]
                                od
                                nwebs -= 1
                             fi
                         fi
                      od
                   od
               end     II Coalesce_Regs

 FIG . 16.15   Code to coalesce registers.



         5.    It enables us to ensure that instructions that require a register pair for som e operand
               or result are assigned such a pair.

               We do not take any o f these issues into account in the algorithm in Figure 16.15, but
               there are related exercises at the end o f the chapter.
              Section 16.3       Graph Coloring                                                        501

16.3.7        Computing Spill Costs
              The next phase of the allocation process is to compute costs for spilling and restoring
              (or rematerializing) register contents, in case it turns out not to be possible to allocate
              all the symbolic registers directly to real registers. Spilling has the effect of potentially
              splitting a web into two or more webs and thus reducing the interferences in the
              graph. For example, in Figure 16.5, we can split the web that includes the definition
              of y in block B2 and its use in block B4 into two webs by introducing a store of the
              register containing y at the end of B2 and a load from the location it was stored to
              at the beginning of B4.
                   If spill decisions are made carefully, they both make the graph R-colorable and
              insert the minimum number of stores and reloads, as measured dynamically.
                   Spilling register contents to memory after they are set and reloading them (or
              rematerializing them) when they are about to be needed is a graph-coloring reg­
              ister allocator’s primary tool for making an interference graph R-colorable. It has
              the effect of potentially splitting a web into two or more webs and so reducing
              the interferences in the graph, thus increasing the chance that the result will be
              R-colorable.
                   Each adjacency-list element has a component sp c o st that estimates the cost of
              spilling the corresponding symbolic register, in a way that resembles the usage counts
              described in Section 16.1.
                   More specifically, the cost of spilling a web w is taken to be

                defwt-           \0 depth{def) + usewt • £     10depth(use) - copywt ■ £      10depth(copy)
                         defew                         useew                         copyew


              where def, use, and copy are individual definitions, uses, and register copies in the
              web w\ defwt, usewt, and copywt are relative weights assigned to the instruction
              types.
                  Computing spill costs should take the following into account:

         1.   If a web’s value can be more efficiently recomputed than reloaded, the cost of
              recomputing it is used instead.
         2.   If the source or target of a copy instruction is spilled, the instruction is no longer
              needed.
         3.   If a spilled value is used several times in the same basic block and the restored value
              remains live until the last use of the spilled value in that block, then only a single
              load of the value is needed in the block.

                   The ican routine Compute_Spill_Costs( ) in Figure 16.16 computes and saves
              the spill cost for each register in the adjacency lists. The weights of loads, stores, and
              copies are the values of UseWt, DefWt, and CopyWt, respectively, in Figure 16.3. This
              can be further refined to take immediate loads and adds into account, by checking
              for their occurrence and assigning them weights of 1 also. We incorporate the first
502                R e g iste r A llo c a tio n


                   procedure Compute_Spill_Costs(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                       nblocks: in integer
                       ninsts: in integer — > integer
                       LBlock: in integer — > array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst
                   begin
                       i, j: integer
                       r: real
                       inst: LIRInst
                       II sum the costs of all definitions and uses for each
                       II symbolic register
                       for i := 1 to nblocks do
                          for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                              inst     LBlock[i][j]
                              case LIR_Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
                   binexp:       if inst.opdl.kind = regno then
                                    Adj Lsts[inst.opdl.val].spcost
                                        += UseWt * lO.Otdepth(i)
                                 fi
                                 if inst.opd2.kind = regno then
                                    Adj Lsts[inst.opd2.val].spcost
                                        += UseWt * lO.Otdepth(i)
                                 fi
                   unexp:        if inst.opd.kind = regno then
                                    if inst.kind = regval then
                                        Adj Lsts [inst.opd.val].spcost
                                            -= CopyWt * lO.Otdepth(i)
                                    else
                                        AdjLsts[inst.opd.val].spcost
                                            += UseWt * 10.Otdepth(i)
                                    fi
                                 fi
                   noexp:     esac
                              if LIR_Has_Left(inst.kind) & inst.kind * regval then
                                    AdjLsts[inst.left].spcost
                                        += DefWt * 10.Otdepth(i)
                              fi
                          od
                       od
                       for i := nregs+1 to nwebs do
                          II replace by rematerialization cost if less than
                          II spill cost
                          r := Rematerialize(i,nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                          if r < AdjLsts[i].spcost then
                              AdjLsts[i].spcost := r
                          fi
                       od
                   end      II Compute_Spill_Costs

 F IG . 1 6 .1 6   ican code to com pute spill costs for sym bolic registers.
              Section 16.3     Graph Coloring                                                        503

              two of the above conditions in the algorithm; the third is left as an exercise for the
              reader. The algorithm uses the following functions:

         1.   depth O') returns the depth of loop nesting of basic block i in the flowgraph.
         2.   R e m a te ria liz e (/,n b lo c k s,n in sts,L B lo c k ) returns the cost to recompute the
              symbolic register with number i rather than spilling and reloading it.
         3.   Real O’) returns the real number with the same value as the integer i.


16.3.8        Pruning the Interference Graph
              Next we attempt to R-color the graph, where R is the number of registers available.
              We do not attempt to find an R-coloring exhaustively—that has long been known
              to be an NP-complete problem for R > 3, and besides, the graph may simply not
              be R-colorable. Instead, we use two approaches to simplifying the graph, one that
              is guaranteed to make a section of the graph R-colorable as long as the remainder
              of the graph is R-colorable, and one that optimistically carries on from there. The
              latter approach may not result in an R-coloring immediately, but it very frequently
              makes more of the graph colorable than using just the first approach and so is very
              useful for its heuristic value.
                   The first approach is a simple but remarkably effective observation we call the
              degree < R rule: given a graph that contains a node with degree less than R, the
              graph is R-colorable if and only if the graph without that node is R-colorable. That
              R-colorability of the whole graph implies R-colorability of the graph without the
              selected node is obvious. For the other direction, suppose we have an R-coloring of
              the graph without the distinguished node. Since that node has degree less than R,
              there must be at least one color that is not in use for a node adjacent to it, and the
              node can be assigned that color. Of course, this rule does not make an arbitrary
              graph R-colorable. In fact, Figure 16.17(a) is an example of a graph that is 2-
              colorable but not by this rule and the graph in Figure 16.17(b) is 3-colorable, but not
              by this rule. Flowever, the rule is quite effective in practice for coloring interference




 FIG. 16.17 Example graphs that are (a) 2-colorable and (b) 3-colorable, but not by the degree < R
            rule.
504   Register Allocation


      graphs. For a machine with 32 registers (or twice that, counting floating point), it is
      sufficient to enable coloring of many of the graphs encountered.
           The second approach, the optimistic heuristic, generalizes the degree < R rule
      by removing nodes that have degree > R. The reasoning behind this approach is the
      observation that just because a node has R or more neighbors, they need not all have
      different colors; and, further, they may not use as many as R colors. Thus, if the first
      approach does not exhaust the graph, we continue processing it by optimistically
      selecting candidates for coloring, in the hope that colors will be available for them
      when they are needed.
           Thus, we begin the coloring process by repeatedly searching the graph for nodes
      that have fewer than R neighbors. Each one that we find we remove from the graph
      and place onto the stack, so that we can retrieve them for coloring in the reverse of
      the order we found them. As part of this process, we remember the nodes adjacent
      to each removed node (as the value of the rmvadj field) so they can be used during
      register assignment (see the next section). If we exhaust the graph in the process,
      we have determined that an R-coloring is possible as is. We pop the nodes from the
      stack and assign each of them a color from among those not already assigned to
      adjacent nodes. For example, given the interference graph in Figure 16.2, we can
      remove nodes from the graph and place them on the stack in the following order
      (the bottom of the stack of pruned nodes is at the right):

           r3    r2       rl   s4   s2   si   s3   s5   s6

      We can then pop the nodes and assign them colors (represented by integers) as
      described above and as shown below.
          Node        Color

          r3          1
          r2          2
          rl          3
          s4          1
          s2          2
          si          3
          s3          1
          s5          3
          s6          2

           As indicated above, the degree < R rule is sometimes not applicable. In that case,
      we apply the optimistic heuristic; that is, we choose a node with degree > R and
      minimal spill cost divided by its current degree in the graph and optimistically push
      it onto the stack. We do so in the hope that not all the colors will be used for its
      neighbors, thus postponing spilling decisions from being made during pruning the
      interference graph to the step that actually attempts to assign colors to the nodes,
      namely, the routine A ssign_Regs( ) in Figure 16.20.
           Before we move on to the code for pruning the graph, we note the difficulty of
      keeping the code and the interference graph synchronous with each other as pruning
             Section 16.3    Graph Coloring                                                    505


             procedure Prune_Graph( )
             begin
                 success: boolean
                 i, nodes := nwebs, spillnode: integer
                 spillcost: real
                 Stack := []
                 repeat
                     II apply degree < R rule and push nodes onto stack
                    repeat
                        success := true
                        for i := 1 to nwebs do
                           if AdjLsts[i].nints > 0
                              & AdjLsts[i].nints < nregs then
                              success := false
                              Stack ®= [i]
                              Adjust_Neighbors(i)
                              nodes -= 1
                           fi
                        od
                    until success
                    if nodes * 0 then
                        II find node with minimal spill cost divided by its degree and
                        I| push it onto the stack (the optimistic heuristic)
                        spillcost := 00
                        for i := 1 to nwebs do
                           if AdjLsts[i].nints > 0
                              & AdjLsts[i].spcost/AdjLsts[i].nints < spillcost then
                              spillnode    i
                              spillcost := AdjLsts[i].spcost/AdjLsts[i].nints
                           fi
                        od
                        Stack ®= [spillnode]
                        Adjust.Neighbors(spillnode)
                        nodes -= 1
                    fi
                 until nodes = 0
             end    || Prune.Graph

FIG. 16.18 Code to attempt to R-color the interference graph.

             decisions are made. This can be expensive, since what a spill does is to divide a web
             into several webs (or, in terms of the graph, it divides one node into several nodes).
             The way we deal with this problem is to avoid updating the code while pruning. If
             register assignment fails, then, in the next iteration, building the adjacency matrix
             and lists will be a lot quicker because of the spills that have been inserted.
                  Figure 16.18 shows the ican routine Prune_Graph( ) that applies the degree < R
             rule and the optimistic heuristic to attempt to color the interference graph. It uses
             the routine A djust_N eighbors( ) in Figure 16.19 to effect the removal of a node
506           Register Allocation


              procedure Adjust.Neighbors(i)
                  i: in integer
              begin
                  j, k: integer
                  I| move neighbors of node i from adjnds to rmvadj and
                  I| disconnect node i from its neighbors
                  for k := 1 to IAdjLsts[i].adjndsI do
                      AdjLsts[k].nints -= 1
                      j := 1
                      while j ^ IAdjLsts [k].adjnds| do
                          if AdjLsts[k].adjndsIj = i then
                             AdjLsts[k].adjnds ©= j
                             AdjLsts [k] .rmvadj ®= [i]
                          fi
                           j +- 1
                      od
                  od
                  AdjLsts[i].nints := 0
                  AdjLsts[i].rmvadj ®= AdjLsts[i].adjnds
                  AdjLsts [i] .adjnds := []
              end    |I Adjust_Neighbors

 FIG. 16.19 The routine Adjust_Neighbors( ) used in pruning the interference graph.

              from the graph. The global variable Stack is used to convey to A ssign_Regs( ),
              described in the next subsection, the order in which the nodes were pruned.

16.3.9       Assigning Registers
             The ican routine A ssign_Regs( ) that R-colors the interference graph is given in
             Figure 16.20. It uses the routine M in.Color (r), which returns the minimum color
             number of those colors that are not assigned to nodes adjacent to r, or returns 0 if all
             colors are in use for adjacent nodes; and assigns values to the function Real_Reg(s),
             which returns the real register that symbolic register s has been assigned to.
                  If A ssign_Regs( ) succeeds, Modify_Code( ), shown in Figure 16.21, is in­
             voked next to replace the symbolic registers by the corresponding real registers. Mod-
             ify_C ode( ) uses Color_to_Reg( ) to convert the color assigned to a symbolic reg­
             ister to the corresponding real register’s name. Color_to_Reg( ) uses Real_Reg( )
             to determine which real register has been assigned each color.

16.3.10       Spilling Symbolic Registers
             The number of colors needed to color an interference graph is often called its register
             pressure, and so modifications to the code intended to make the graph colorable are
             described as “ reducing the register pressure.”
                  In general, the effect of spilling is to split a web into two or more webs and to
             distribute the interferences of the original web among the new ones. If, for example,
             Section 16.3      Graph Coloring                                                      507

             procedure Assign_Regs( ) returns boolean
             begin
                 c, i, r: integer
                 success := true: boolean
                 repeat
                     II pop nodes from the stack and assign each one
                     II a color, if possible
                     r := Stackl-1
                     Stack ©= -1
                     c := Min_Color(r)
                     if c > 0 then
                          if r ^ nregs then
                              Real_Reg(c) := r
                          fi
                          AdjLsts[r].color := c
                     else
                          II if no color is available for node r,
                          I| mark it for spilling
                          AdjLsts[r].spill := true
                          success := false
                     fi
                 until Stack = []
                 return success
             end    || Assign_Regs

FIG. 16.20 Routine to assign colors to real and symbolic registers.

             we split web wl in Figure 16.5 by introducing loads and stores as shown by the
             assignments to and from tmp in Figure 16.22, it is replaced by four new webs
             w5, ...,w8, as shown in the following table:
                 Web        Components
                 w2         def x in B5, use x in B6
                 w3         def y in B2, use y in B4
                 w4         def y in Bl, use y in B3
                 w5         def x in B2, tmp    x in B2
                 w6         def x in B3, tmp    x in B3
                 w7         x <- tmp in B4, use x in B4
                 w8         x    tmp in B5, use x in B5
             and the interference graph is as shown in Figure 16.23.
                  Given that we have failed to make the interference graph R-colorable, we next
             spill the nodes marked to be spilled, i.e., the nodes i for which AdjLsts [/] . s p i l l =
             true.
                  The code of Gen_Spill_Code( ) is shown in Figure 16.24. It uses the subrou­
             tine Comp_Disp(r), also in Figure 16.24, to determine whether symbolic register r
             has been assigned a spill displacement. If not, it increments Disp and stores the dis­
             placement in AdjLsts [/] .disp, where i is the index of r in the adjacency lists. The
508             Register Allocation

                procedure Modify_Code(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                   nblocks: in integer
                   ninsts: inout array [1••nblocks] of integer
                   LBlock: inout array [1 ••nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst
                begin
                    i, j, k, m: integer
                    inst: LIRInst
                    II replace each use of a symbolic register by the real
                    II register with the same color
                    for i := 1 to nblocks do
                       for j := 1 to ninsts[i] do
                           inst := LBlock[i] [j]
                           case LIR_Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
                binexp:       if inst.opdl.kind = regno
                                 & Reg_to_Int(inst.opdl.val) > nregs then
                                 LBlock[i][j].opdl.val :=
                                     Color_to_Reg(AdjLsts[inst.opdl.val].color)
                              fi
                              if inst.opd2.kind = regno
                                 & Reg_to_Int(inst.opd2.val) > nregs then
                                 LBlock[i][j].opd2.val :-
                                    Color_to_Reg(Adj Lsts[inst.opd2.val].color)
                              fi
                unexp:        if inst.opd.kind = regno
                                 & Reg_to_Int(inst.opd.val) > nregs then
                                 LBlock[i][j].opd.val :=
                                    Color_to_Reg(Adj Lsts[inst.opd.val].color)
                              fi
                listexp:      for k := 1 to linst.argsl do
                                 if Reg_to_Int(inst.argslk@l.regno) > nregs then
                                    m := AdjLsts[inst.argslk@l.val] .color
                                    LBlock[i][j].argsli@l.val :=
                                        Color_to_Reg(m)
                                 fi
                              od
                noexp:     esac
                           if LIR_Has_Left(inst.kind) then
                              if Reg_to_Int(inst.left) > nregs then
                                 LBlock[i][j].left :=
                                    Color_to_Reg(AdjLsts[inst.left].color)
                              fi
                           fi
                       od
                    od
                end      II Modify_Code

 F IG . 16.21   ic a n   r o u t i n e t o m o d i f y t h e i n s t r u c t i o n s in t h e p r o c e d u r e t o h a v e r e a l r e g i s t e r s i n p l a c e
                o f s y m b o lic o n e s .
              Section 16.3        Graph Coloring                                                                  509




FIG. 16.22 The example in Figure 16.5 after splitting web wl.




              © -— ®                   ©            ©

              ® -— @                   ©
FIG. 16.23    Interferences among the webs in Figure 16.22.


              variable BaseReg holds the name of the register to be used as the base register in
              spilling and restoring. G en_Spill_C ode( ) uses two other functions, as follows:

         1.   in s e r t _ b e fo r e ( /,/ ,n in s t s ,L B lo c k ,m s £ ) inserts the instruction inst immediately
              before instruction LB lock f/] [/] (see Figure 4.14).
        2.    in s e r t _ a f t e r ( / ,/ ,n i n s t s ,L B l o c k ,m s £ ) inserts the instruction inst immediately
              after instruction LB lockf/] [/] (see Figure 4.14).

                  Note that G en_Spill_C ode( ) does not take into account load or add immedi-
              ates or other ways of rematerialization and that it only deals with word-size oper­
              ands as written. Exercises at the end of the chapter deal with some o f these issues.
                  Note also that if we must insert spill code for symbolic registers that are defined
              and/or used in a loop, then, if possible, we should restore them before entering the
              loop and spill them after exiting it. This may require edge splitting, as described in
              Section 13.3. In particular, in the example in Figure 16.26, if we had to spill s2, we
              would introduce new basic blocks B la between B1 and B2 and B2a between B2 and
              B4, with a restore for s2 in B la and a spill for it in B2a.
510           Register Allocation

              procedure Gen_Spill_Code(nblocks,ninsts,LBlock)
                 nblocks: in integer
                 ninsts: inout array [1•-nblocks] of integer
                 LBlock: inout array [1•-nblocks] of array [••] of LIRInst
              begin
                 i, j , regct := 0: integer
                 inst: LIRInst
                 II check each definition and use of a symbolic register
                 II to determine whether it is marked to be spilled, and,
                 II if so, compute the displacement for it and insert
                 I| instructions to load it before each use and store
                 II it after each definition
                 for i := 1 to nblocks do
                    j    1
                    while j ^ ninsts[i] do
                       inst := LBlock[i][j]
                       case LIR_Exp_Kind(inst.kind) of
              binexp:     if AdjLsts[inst.opdl.val].spill then
                             Comp_Disp(inst.opdl.val)
                             insert_before(i,j,ninsts,LBlock,<kind:loadmem,
                                left:inst.opdl.val,addr:<kind:addrrc,
                                reg:BaseReg,disp:Disp>>)
                              j += 1
                           fi
                           if inst.opd2 * inst.opdl
                              & AdjLsts[inst.opd2.val].spill then
                              Comp_Disp(inst.opd2.val)
                              insert_before(i,j,ninsts,LBlock,<kind:loadmem,
                                 left:inst.opd2.val,addr:<kind:addrrc,
                                 reg:BaseReg,disp:Disp>>)
                              j += 1
                           fi
              unexp:       if AdjLsts [inst.opd.val].spill then
                              Comp_Disp(inst.opd.val)
                              insert_before(i,j ,ninsts,LBlock,<kind:loadmem,
                                 left:inst.opd.val,addr:<kind:addrrc,
                                 reg:BaseReg,disp:Disp>>)
                                j += 1
                           fi

 FIG. 16.24   i c a n code to generate spill code using the costs computed by Compute_Spill_Costs( )

              in Figure 16.16.




16.3.11       Two Examples of Register Allocation by Graph Coloring
              As our first example of register allocation by graph coloring, consider the flowgraph
              in Figure 16.25, where c is a nonlocal variable, and assume that we have five
              registers, r l , r2, r3, r4, and r5, available (so R = 5) for allocation, except that
            Section 16.3       Graph Coloring                                             511

            listexp:         for k := 1 to linst.argsl do
                                if AdjLsts[inst.argslk@l.val].spill then
                                   Comp_Disp(inst.argslk@l.val)
                                   insert_before(i,j,ninsts,LBlock,
                                      <kind:loadmem,left:inst.opd.val,
                                      addr:<kind:addrrc,
                                      reg:BaseReg,disp:Disp>>)
                                   regct += 1
                                fi
                             od
                             j +« regct - 1
            noexp:        esac
                          if LIR_Has_Left(inst.kind)
                             & AdjLsts[inst.left].spill then
                             Comp_Disp(inst.left)
                             insert.after(i,j,ninsts,LBlock,<kind:stormem,
                                addr:<kind:addrrc,
                                reg:BaseReg,disp:Disp>>,
                                opd:<kind:regno,val:inst.left >>)
                             j +- 1
                          fi
                     od
               od
            end       II Gen_Spill_Code

            procedure Comp_Disp(r)
               r: in Register
            begin
                I| if symbolic register r has no displacement yet,
                I| assign one and increment Disp
                I| Note: this assumes each operand is no larger
                II than a word
               if AdjLsts [Reg_to_Int (r)] .color =  then
                   AdjLsts[Reg.to.Int(r)].disp := Disp
                   Disp += 4
               fi
            end       II Comp.Disp

FIG. 16.24 (continued)




            only g can be in r5. Further, assume that the execution frequencies of blocks B l,
            B3, and B4 are 1 and that of B2 is 7. There is one web per symbolic register,
            so we use the names of the symbolic registers for the webs, as shown in Figure
            16.26.
                Then we build the adjacency matrix for the code in Figure 16.26, as shown
            in Figure 16.27(b), along with a graphic presentation of the interference graph in
            Figure 16.27(a).
512            R egister A llocation




 FIG . 16.25   A small example of register allocation by graph coloring.




 FIG. 16.26 The example in Figure 16.25 with symbolic registers substituted for the local variables.
               Section 16.3    Graph Coloring                                                            513
                                si




                                                                    rl r2 r3 r4 r5 si s2 s3 s4 s5
                                                              r2    ~t                                     -
                                                              r3     t   t
                                                              r4     t   t   t
                                                              r5     t   t   t   t
                                                              si     f   f   f   f   t
                                                              s2     f   f   f   f   t   t
                                                              s3     f   f   f   f   t   t   t
                                                              s4     f   f   f   f   t   t   t   t
                                                              s5     f   f   f   f   f   t   t   t   t
                                                              s6     f   f   f   f   t   t   t   t   t   t_

         (a)                                                  (b)
FIG. 16.27 The interference graph (a) and adjacency matrix (b) for the example in Figure 16.26,
           where t and f stand for true and f a ls e , respectively.




FIG. 16.28 The example in Figure 16.26 after coalescing registers s4 and s i.

                   Applying coalescing to the copy assignment s4       s i in block B1 in Figure 16.26
               results in the flowgraph in Figure 16.28 and the new interference graph and adja­
               cency matrix in Figure 16.29. Now there are no further opportunities for coalescing,
               so we build the adjacency lists for the routine, as shown in Figure 16.30.
514            Register A llocation




 FIG* 16*29 The interference graph (a) and adjacency matrix (b) for the example in Figure 16.28
            after coalescing symbolic registers s i and s4, where t and f stand for tru e and f a ls e ,
            respectively.


                                                                   adjnds
                    color   disp spcost n ints      1    2    3    4    5        6        7    8

               rl
                                    3 0 r 2 r3 r4 r5
               r2    -       -      3 ] G H l rl r3 r4 r5
               r3    -«      -C O
                                    3 ] H 3 r2 r4 r5
               r4    -»      -0 0
                                    00 c n               r2   r3   r5

               r5

               si
                     — 00    -C O
                                    3 0 lrl
                                      0.0 | | 5 | | r5
                                                         r2

                                                         s2
                                                              r3

                                                              s3
                                                                   r4

                                                                   s5
                                                                            si

                                                                            s6
                                                                                     s2       s3   s6



               s2    -                0.0 | | 5 | | r5   si   s3   s5       s6

               s3    -       — CO     0.0 | | 5 | | r5   si   s2   s5       s6

               s5    -                0.0 | | 4 | | si   s2   s3   s6

               s6    - »              0.0 | | 5 | 1 r5   si   s2   s3       s5

 FIG. 16.30 The adjacency lists for the code in Figure 16.28.
             Section 16.3    Graph Coloring                                                       515

                  Next we compute spill costs, using DefWt = UseWt = 2 and CopyWt = 1, as follows:

                  Symbolic
                  Register        Spill Cost

                  si              2 .0
                  s2              1 .0 + 2 1 .0 + 2 .0 + 2 .0 = 2 6.0
                  s3              6 .0 + 14.0 + 4 .0 + 2 .0 = 26.0
                  s5              2 .0 + 4 .0 + 2 .0 = 8 .0
                  s6              00

             Note that the spill cost for s i is 2 .0 because the assignment to it is a load immediate
             and it can be rematerialized in block B3 by a load immediate placed just before its
             use in the second instruction. Also, we make the spill cost of s6 infinite because the
             symbolic register is dead.
                  From there we proceed to pruning the graph. Since each of r l through r4 has
             fewer than five neighbors, we remove them and push them onto the stack, resulting
             in the stack appearing as follows:

                   r4   r3   r2     rl

             The resulting interference graph is shown in Figure 16.31 and the corresponding ad­
             jacency lists are shown in Figure 16.32. Now node r5 has fewer than five neighbors,
             so we remove it and push it onto the stack, resulting in the stack

                   r5   r4   r3     r2   rl




             r5




FIG. 16.31 The interference graph that results from pushing r l through r4 onto the stack.
516           Register Allocation


                                                                     a d jn d s

                  color     disp spcost nints              1    2        3        4    5


                                             ed
                                             m
                                             m
                                             m
                                             ED            si   s2      s3        s6

                                             El r5              s2      s3        s5   s6

                                             ED r5              sl      s3        s5   s6

                                             m         1        sl      s2        s5   s6

              s5 |        | | -« | | 8.0 |
                                             ED 1sl             s2      s3        s5


              56ED ED CD ED r5                                  sl      s2        s3   s5

 FIG, 16,32 The adjacency lists corresponding to the interference graph in Figure 16.31.


                             si




 FIG. 16.33 The interference graph that results from pushing r5 onto the stack.


              and the resulting interference graph is shown in Figure 16.33 and the corresponding
              adjacency lists are shown in Figure 16.34.
                  Now no node has five or more adjacent nodes, so we push the remaining
              symbolic registers onto the stack in an arbitrary order, as follows:

                     si    s2     s3   s5    s6   r5       r4   r3       r2       rl
             Section 16.3         Graph Coloring                                               517
                                                            a d jn d s

                  color disp spcost nints             1 2           3    4

             rl    —
                   00
                             -    1[ 3 m
             r2              —
                             00 |
                   —                m           H
             r3    —
                   00        -      C   3 m
             r4    —         m
                             —
                             00         »   |
             r5
                  1-1 1 1[ 3 m
             si
                      1 1 m  -
                                                    | s2   s3      s5    s6

             s2 —00 l - l | 26.0[ [3 1sl s3 s5 s6
             s3 — 00
                     1—co 1| 2 6 . 0 | 13 1Sl s2 s5 s6
                - 11- 13 1 m
             s5                            s i s2 s3 s5

             s6 -•» 11- 1                 1sl s2 s3 s5
FIG. 16.34 The adjacency lists corresponding to the interference graph in Figure 16.33.



             and we color them (i.e., assign real registers to symbolic ones) as we pop them off,
             as follows:

                  Register        Color

                  si              1
                  s2              2
                  s3              3
                  s5              4
                  s6              5
                  r5              4
                  r4              1
                  r3              2
                  r2              3
                  rl              5


             and we have achieved a register allocation without spilling any registers to memory.
             Figure 16.35 shows the flowgraph with real registers substituted for the symbolic
             ones.
                 Our second example will require spilling a register. We begin with the code in
             Figure 16.36, with symbolic registers already in use in the code and with the assump­
             tion that real registers r2, r3, and r4 are available for allocation. The interference
             graph and adjacency matrix for this example are shown in Figure 16.37.
518           Register Allocation


                                    e n try   |




 FIG. 16.35 The flowgraph in Figure 16.28 with real registers substituted for symbolic registers.




 FIG. 16.36 Another example flowgraph for register allocation by graph coloring.

                  There are no opportunities for coalescing, so we construct the adjacency lists,
              as shown in Figure 16.38. Next, we compute the spill costs and fill them in in the
              adjacency lists. Note that the spill costs of s i and s9 are both infinite, since s i is
              dead on exit from B1 and s9 is dead at its definition point.
                   Next we prune the graph. Node s i (with no adjacent nodes) is removed and
              pushed onto the stack. The real registers, s4, and s9 (with two adjacent nodes each)
              are removed next and pushed onto the stack, as follows:
             Section 16.3        Graph Coloring                                               519
                                                                s9




                   r2 r3 r4 si s2 s3 s4 s5 s6 s7 s8
             r3    "t                             -
             r4     t   t
             si     f   f    f
             s2     f   f    f   f
             s3     f   f    f   f    t
             s4     f   f    f   f    t f
             s5     f   f    f   f    t t   t
             s6     f   f    f   f    t t   f t
             s7     f   f    f   f    f t   f t t
             s8     f   f    f   f    f f   f t f t
             s9    _f   f    f   f    f f   f f f t        t

             (b)
FIG. 16.37 The interference graph (a) and adjacency matrix (b) for the example in Figure 16.36.



                   s9   s4       r4   r3    r2   si

             and the resulting interference graph is shown in Figure 16.39(a). Removing node s8
             and pushing it onto the stack results in the stack

                   s8   s9       s4   r4    r3   r2   si

             and the interference graph shown in Figure 16.39(b).
                 We are left with a graph in which every node has degree greater than or equal to
             three, so we select a node with minimal spill cost divided by current degree, namely,
             s7, to be pushed onto the stack. This reduces the interference graph to the form
             shown graphically in Figure 16.39(c). So we again select a node with minimal spill
             cost divided by current degree, namely, s5, and push it onto the stack. The resulting
             interference graph is shown in Figure 16.40(a). Now all nodes have degree less than
             three, so we push them all onto the stack, resulting in the stack
520           Register A llocation


                                                              a d jn d s

                  color   disp spcost nints         1    2        3        4    5

                                          nn             r4


                                          cm ir2         r4

                                          nn Lr2         r3

                                          m
                                          Du Is3         s4      s6

                                          m Is2          s5      s6        s7

                                          DU Is2         s5

                                          DU Is3         s4      s6        s7   s8

                                          PH Is2         s3      s5        s7


                                          DU Is3         s5      s6        s8   s9

                                          PI Is5         s7      s9

                                          DEILfL         s8

 FIG, 16.38 The adjacency lists for       code in Figure 16.36.

                          s3         s7                         s3              s7        s3




 FIG. 16.39   (a) The interference graph after removing nodes s i , r2, r3, r4, s4, and s9, and pushing
              them onto the stack, (b) then removing node s8 and pushing it onto the stack, and
              (c) after removing node s7 and pushing it onto the stack.


                    s2    s3   s6    s5   s7   s8   s9   s4        r4      r3   r2   si

                   N ow we begin popping nodes off the stack, assigning them colors, and
              reconstructing the adjacency-lists form of the interference graph from the
              A d jL sts [ ] .rm vadj fields. After popping the top four nodes, we have the interfer­
              ence graph shown in Figure 16.40(b) (with the colors shown in bold type in circles),
              and there is no color available for node s5.
                   So we proceed to generate spill code for s7 and s5 in block B4 with BaseReg
              = rlO and D isp = 0 and D isp = 4, respectively, as shown in Figure 16.41. Next we
              Section 16.3          Graph Coloring                                                 521




               s2            s6 @              s2"
              0                               0
              (a)                             (b)
 FIG. 16.40 The interference graph (a) after popping the top three nodes from the stack and (b) after
            popping the fourth node.




 FIG. 16.41 The flowgraph in Figure 16.36 with spill code included for s5 and s7.

              build the interference graph for the new flowgraph, as shown in Figure 16.42, and
              it becomes clear that we may simply proceed to prune the graph and assign real
              registers to the symbolic registers with the same colors, as shown in Figure 16.43.

16.3.12       Other Issues
              Bernstein et al. [BerG89] discuss three heuristics that can be used to select values to
              spill and an allocator that tries all three and uses the best of them. Their first heuris­
              tic is
                              cost(w)
522           Register Allocation




                            ®




 FIG. 16.42 The interference graph for the code in Figure 16.41.




 FIG. 16.43 The flowgraph in Figure 16.41 with real registers substituted for the symbolic ones.




              and is based on the observation that spilling a web with high degree reduces the
              degree of many other nodes and so is more likely to maximize the number of webs
              that have degree < R after spilling. The second and third heuristics use a measure
              called area{ ), defined as follows:
              Section 16.3      Graph Coloring                                                  523
                                      T




                       instl       inst2          inst3


                                      x
FIG. 16.44 Rematerialization lattice.


                  area(w) — ^              (width(I) • sdepth(<1))
                               Ieinst(w)

              where inst(w) is the set of instructions in web w, width(I) is the number of webs live
              at instruction J, and depth(I) is the loop nesting level of J. The two heuristics are
              intended to take into account the global effect of each web on the register pressure
              and are as follows:

                  h2(w) ~          costjw)
                             area(w) • degree(w)
                                  cost(w)
                  h^(w) = ------------ :---------- =■
                          area(w) ♦ degree(w)z

              Of 15 programs that the authors report trying the three heuristics and other modifi­
              cations on, the first heuristic does best on four, the second does best on six, and the
              third on eight (the second and third are tied on one program), and in every case, the
              best of them is better than previous approaches. This allocator is now part of the
              IBM compilers for power and PowerPC (see Section 21.2).
                   Briggs [Brig92] suggests a series of additional extensions to the allocation algo­
              rithm, including the following:

         1.   a more satisfactory method for handling register pairs than Nickerson’s approach for
              the Intel 386 architecture [Nick90] that results from postponing spilling decisions to
              after registers have been assigned (see also Exercise 16.4);
        2.    an improved method of rematerialization, the process of regenerating in registers val­
              ues such as constants that are more efficiently recomputed than spilled and reloaded;
              and
        3.    an approach to aggressively splitting webs before coloring that takes into account
              the structure of a procedure’s flowgraph, unlike the interference graph.

                   Briggs’s approach to rematerialization involves splitting a web into the values
              that make it up, performing a data-flow computation that associates with each po­
              tentially rematerializable value the instruction(s) that would be used to rematerialize
              it, and constructing new webs, each consisting of values that have the same instruc­
              tion associated with them. The lattice is a flat one, as shown in Figure 16.44. Note
              that in the case of large constants on a Rise architecture, the code to rematerialize a
524           Register Allocation


              value might be two instructions, a load upper immediate and an add to the loaded
              register. Occasionally, a web is split further by this process than is ideal, and a fix-up
              phase is used to find such webs and reconnect them.


16.4          Priority-Based Graph Coloring
              Register allocation by priority-based graph coloring is similar in its overall structure
              to the approach described in the preceding section, but differs from it in several
              important details, some essential and some incidental. The approach originated
              with Chow and Hennessy ([ChoH84] and [ChoH90]) and is intended to be more
              sensitive to the costs and benefits of individual allocation decisions than the previous
              approach.
                    One significant difference is that the priority-based approach allocates all objects
              to “ home” memory locations before register allocation and then attempts to migrate
              them to registers, rather than allocating them to symbolic registers, trying to pack the
              symbolic registers into the real registers, and generating spill code as necessary. While
              the two approaches may appear to be equivalent in this regard, with symbolic reg­
              isters corresponding to home memory locations that have simply not been assigned
              to specific addresses, they are not. The graph-coloring approach is optimistic—it be­
              gins with the assumption that all the symbolic registers might be allocatable to real
              registers, and it may succeed in doing so. On the other hand, priority-based coloring
              is pessimistic: it may not be able to allocate all the home memory locations to reg­
              isters, so, for an architecture without storage-to-storage operations (i.e., a Rise), it
              needs to reserve four registers of each variety for use in evaluating expressions that
              involve variables that it does not succeed in allocating to registers. Thus, it begins
              with a handicap, namely, fewer registers are available for allocation.
                   Another difference is that the priority-based approach was designed a priori to
              be machine-independent, so it is parameterized with several machine-specific quanti­
              ties that specialize it to a given implementation. This is not a major difference—there
              is not much about the other approach that is machine-specific either. The quantities
              are some of the ones defined in Section 16.2, namely, Idcost, stcost, usesave, and
              defsave.
                   A third, more significant difference is in the concepts of web and interference
              used. Chow and Hennessy represent the web of a variable as the set of basic blocks
              it is live in and call it a live range. As the example in Figure 16.45 shows, this is
              conservative, but it may be much less precise than the graph-coloring method, in
              which none of the variables x, y, z, and w are live at a definition point of another,


                  x <- a + b             B1
                  y <- x + c
                  if y = 0 goto LI
                  z <- y + d             B2
                  w <- z
              LI: . . .                  B3

 FIG. 16.45 Example of code for which Chow and Hennessy’s live ranges are less precise than our
              webs.
              Section 16.5      Other Approaches to Register Allocation                                      525




                                                                    •         •
                                                                   x           y

                                                                   (b)
FIG. 16.46 (a) Priority-based graph-coloring interference graph and (b) graph-coloring interference
           graphs for the code in Figure 16.45.


              so there are no interferences among them. Using Chow and Hennessy’s method, x
              interferes with y, y with both z and w, and z and w with each other. The resulting
              interference graphs are shown in Figure 16.46.7
                   Larus and Hilfinger’s register allocator for the spur lisp compiler [LarH86] uses
              a version of priority-based coloring. It differs from Chow and Hennessy’s approach
              in two ways, as follows:
         1.   It assigns temporaries to registers ab initio and generates spill code for them as
              needed.
         2.   It operates on spur assembly language, rather than on medium-level intermediate
              code, and so must add load and store instructions for spilled temporaries.
                  Briggs [Brig92] investigated the running times of two register allocators, one his
              own and the other a priority-based allocator. He found that his allocator seemed
              to run in 0 (n log n) time on his test programs, while the priority-based allocator
              seemed to require 0 (n 2) time, where n is the number of instructions in the program.


16.5          Other Approaches to Register Allocation
              Several other approaches to global register allocation by graph coloring have been
              presented and evaluated, including two that use a procedure’s control tree (see
              Section 7.6) to guide spilling or graph-pruning decisions, one by Callahan and
              Koblenz [CalK91] and one by Knobe and Zadeck [KnoZ92].
                   Another approach, developed by Gupta, Soffa, and Steele [GupS89], uses maxi­
              mal clique separators to perform graph coloring. A clique is a graph with each node
              connected to every other node by an arc. A clique separator is a subgraph that is a
              clique such that removing the subgraph splits the containing graph into two or more
              unconnected subgraphs. A clique separator is maximal if there is no node (and its
              incident arcs) in the graph that can be added to the clique separator to produce a
              larger clique. Maximal clique separators with at most R nodes have two attractive
              properties: they divide a program into segments for which register allocation can be

              7. The original presentation of register allocation by priority-based graph coloring included a fur­
              ther significant departure from the basic graph-coloring approach. Namely, the allocation process
              was divided into local and global phases, with the local phase used to do allocation within basic
              blocks and across small clusters of basic blocks.
526         Register Allocation


            performed separately and they can be constructed by examining the code, without
            actually constructing the full interference graph.
                 In Section 20.3, we discuss an approach to register allocation for array ele­
            ments that can have significant performance impact, especially for repetitive nu­
            merical computations; and in Section 19.6, we discuss link-time and compile-time
            approaches to interprocedural register allocation.
                 Register allocation can needlessly decrease the available instruction-level paral­
            lelism by reusing registers sooner than they need be; this can be alleviated by doing
            hardware or software register renaming (Section 17.4.5) and, in part, by tuning the
            register allocator to cycle through the registers rather than reusing them as soon as
            they become free. Alternatively, register allocation and scheduling can be integrated
            into a single pass. Several researchers have investigated ways to combine the two
            into one phase that achieves the best of both. The efforts of Bradlee, Eggers, and
            Henry [BraE91] and of Pinter [Pint93] are steps in this direction.


16.6        Wrap-Up
            In this chapter we have covered register allocation and assignment, which are among
            the most important optimizations for almost all programs. We have seen that reg­
            ister allocation should be done on low-level code, either an intermediate form or
            assembly language, because it is essential that all loads and stores and their address
            computations be explicit.
                 We began with a discussion of a venerable, quick, and tolerably effective local
            approach that depends on usage counts and loop nesting to decide what objects
            should be in registers. Then we presented in detail a much more effective approach,
            namely, global register allocation by graph coloring, and briefly another approach
            that also uses graph coloring but that is generally less effective. We also alluded to an
            approach that uses bin packing; two relatively new approaches that use a procedure’s
            control tree to guide allocation and spilling decisions; and another new approach
            that uses maximal clique separators.
                 We have seen that register allocation by graph coloring usually results in very
            effective allocations without a major cost in compilation speed. It represents allocat-
            able quantities (symbolic registers) and the real registers by nodes in a graph and the
            interferences among them by arcs. It then attempts to color the nodes with a number
            of colors equal to the number of available registers, so that every node is assigned
            a color distinct from those of its neighbor nodes. If this cannot be done, code is in­
            troduced to spill symbolic registers to memory and to reload them where they are
            needed, and the process is repeated until the coloring goal has been achieved.
                 The major lessons to be garnered from this chapter are the following:12

       1.   There are reasonably effective local methods of register allocation that cost very little
            in compilation time and are suitable for unoptimized compilation.
       2.   There is a global method of register allocation, graph coloring, that is very effective,
            costs somewhat more than the local approach, and is appropriate for optimized
            compilation.
              Section 16.6   Wrap-Up                                                           527




FIG. 16.47 Place of register allocation (in bold type) in an aggressive optimizing compiler.
              (continued)

         3.   Research continues into other approaches that may well produce even more ef­
              fective allocators—probably without requiring significantly more time than graph
              coloring—and that may combine register allocation and instruction scheduling with­
              out adversely impacting either.
                  The appropriate placement of global register allocation by graph coloring in an
              aggressive optimizing compiler is marked by bold type in Figure 16.47.
                  Further coverage of register allocation appears in Chapter 19, where interpro­
              cedural methods are discussed. Some of these methods work on code below the
              assembly-language level, namely, on relocatable object modules that are annotated
528          Register Allocation




 FIG* 16.47 (continued)


             with information about data usage patterns. Also, scalar replacement of array ref­
             erences (Section 20.3) and scalar replacement of aggregates (Section 12.2), among
             other optimizations, are designed to improve register allocation.



16.7         Further Reading
             Freiburghouse’s approach to local register allocation is described in [Frei74]. The
             IBM Fortran FI compilers for the IBM 360 and 370 series systems are described
             in [LowM69]. The b l i s s language is described in [WulR71] and the groundbreaking
             PDP-11 compiler for it in [WulJ75].
                  Cocke noted that global register allocation can be viewed as a graph-coloring
             problem, as reported by Kennedy in [Kenn71]. Chaitin’s original graph-coloring
             allocator for an experimental IBM 370 PL/I compiler is described in [ChaA81]
             and its adaptation to the PL.8 compiler, including several refinements, is described
             in [Chai82]. A demonstration that general graph coloring is NP-complete can be
             found in [GarJ79]. Briggs, Cooper, Kennedy, and Torczon’s original discussion of the
             optimistic heuristic is found in [BriC89] and is also discussed in [Brig92], on which
             the current account is based. The exploration of coloring heuristics by Bernstein et al.
             Section 16.8    Exercises                                                         529


             is found in [BerG89]. Nickerson’s approach to handling register pairs and larger
             groups is found in [Nick90].
                  Priority-based graph coloring was invented by Chow and Hennessy (see
             [ChoH84] and [ChoH90]). The earlier of these presentations includes splitting
             the allocation process into local and global phases, which was later found to be
             unnecessary. Larus and Hilfinger’s [LarH86] register allocator uses a variation of
             priority-based graph coloring.
                  Briggs’s comparison of his allocator with Chow’s priority-based allocator is
             found in [Brig92].
                  Callahan and Koblenz’s and Knobe and Zadeck’s approaches to using a pro­
             cedure’s control tree to guide spilling decisions are described in [CalK91] and
             [KnoZ92], respectively. Gupta, Soffa, and Steele’s use of maximal clique separators
             to perform register allocation is described in [GupS89].
                  Bradlee, Eggers, and Henry [BraE91] and Pinter [Pint93] discuss approaches to
             combining register allocation and instruction scheduling into a single compilation
             phase.



16.8         Exercises
       16.1 Explain how Build_AdjMtx( ) in Figure 16.12 and C o a le sc e _ R e g iste rs( ) in
            Figure 16.15 can be used to ensure that argument values are moved to (or computed
            in) the proper registers before a procedure call and, in the callee, that parameters
            passed in registers are moved to the proper ones for them to be worked on.

       16.2 Explain how Build_AdjMtx( ) in Figure 16.12 and C o a le sc e _ R e g iste rs( ) in
            Figure 16.15 can be used to enable machine instructions that require specific source
            and target registers to have their operands and results in those registers.

       16.3 Explain how Build_AdjMtx( ) in Figure 16.12 and C o a le sc e _ R e g iste rs( ) in
            Figure 16.15 can be used to enable two-address instructions to have their target
            register, and the operand that must be in that register, handled as required.

       16.4 Modify the code in Figure 16.15 to enable one to ensure that instructions that require
            a register pair for some operand or result are assigned a pair.

       16.5 Modify the algorithm C om pute_Spill_C osts( ) in Figure 16.16 to produce spill
            costs that take into account that if a spilled value is used several times in the same
            basic block and is not killed before its last use in the block, then only a single load
            of the value is needed in the block.

 ADV 16.6 The graphs in Figure 16.17 can be generalized to produce, for each R, a minimal
          graph (i.e., with the minimal number of nodes) that is R-colorable but not by the
          degree < R rule. Explain how.

       16.7 What are the space requirements for the (a) adjacency matrix and (b) adjacency lists
            for a procedure with w webs?
530          Register Allocation


       16.8 Modify the procedure Gen_Spill_Code( ) in Figure 16.24 to deal with the issues
            mentioned at the end of Section 16.3.7, namely, (a) rematerialization, (b) deletion of
            copy instructions, and (c) multiple uses of a spilled value within a basic block. Note
            that, in Figure 16.41, we would have produced better code if, instead of spilling s7,
            we had rematerialized it before the p rin t ( ) call.
  ADV 16.9 Develop the data-flow analysis alluded to in Section 16.3.12 that determines where
           rematerialization is useful.
RSCH 16.10 Read one of the articles by Callahan and Koblenz [CalK91], Knobe and Zadeck
           [KnoZ92], or Gupta, Soffa, and Steele [GupS89] and compare and contrast their
           methods with the graph-coloring approach discussed here.
                                                               CHAPTER 17



                                 Code Scheduling




I
     n this chapter, we are concerned with methods for scheduling or reordering
     instructions to improve performance, an optimization that is among the most
     important for most programs on most machines. The approaches include basic-
     block scheduling, branch scheduling, cross-block scheduling, software pipelining,
trace scheduling, and percolation scheduling. We also cover optimization for super­
scalar implementations.
     Before the advent of Rise machines, there were pipelined computers, but their
pipelining was generally hidden in a microengine that interpreted user-level instruc­
tions. To maximize the speed of such machines, it was essential that the microcode
be written so as to overlap the execution of instructions whenever possible. Also,
user code could be written so that it took better or worse advantage of the pipelin­
ing in the microengine. A classic paper by Rymarczyk [Ryma82] provides guidelines
for assembly-language programmers writing code for a pipelined processor, such as
an IBM System/370 implementation. Nowadays, more and more CISC implementa­
tions, such as the Intel Pentium and Pentium Pro, make heavy use of pipelining also.
Optimization for Rises and for recent and future cisc implementations has a crucial
need for scheduling to maximize performance.
     The development of algorithms for instruction scheduling grew out of research
in microcode compaction and job-shop scheduling, but there are enough differences
among the three areas that many of the techniques used in instruction scheduling are
comparatively new.
     The combination of basic-block and branch scheduling is the simplest approach
discussed here. It operates on each basic block and on each branch separately, is the
simplest method to implement, and can produce significant improvements in code
speed, frequently 10% or more. Cross-block scheduling improves on basic-block
scheduling by considering a tree of blocks at once and may move instructions from
one block to another.

                                                                              531
532    Code Scheduling


            Software pipelining operates specifically on loop bodies and, since loops are
       where most programs spend most of their execution time, can result in large im­
       provements in performance, often a factor of two or more.
            Three transformations can significantly improve the effectiveness of basic-block
       scheduling and, especially, software pipelining: loop unrolling, variable expansion,
       and register renaming. Loop unrolling creates longer basic blocks and opportunities
       for cross-block scheduling in loop bodies. Variable expansion expands variables in
       an unrolled loop body to one per copy of the body; the values of these variables
       can then be combined after execution of the loop is completed. Register renaming
       is a transformation that may improve the effectiveness of either scheduling method
       by changing the register usage in a block (or larger unit) of code, so as to remove
       constraints that are caused by unnecessary immediate reuse of registers.
            In a compiler that does software pipelining, it is crucial to making it as effec­
       tive as possible to have loop unrolling, variable expansion, and register renaming
       available to be performed on the loop bodies that are being pipelined. If the com­
       piler does not do software pipelining, then loop unrolling and variable expansion
       should be done earlier in the compilation process; we recommend doing loop un­
       rolling between dead-code elimination and code hoisting in box C4 of the diagram
       in Figure 17.40.
            Trace and percolation scheduling are two global (i.e., procedure-wide) ap­
       proaches to code scheduling that can have very large benefits for some types of
       programs and architectures, typically high-degree superscalar and VLIW machines.
            All the transformations discussed in this chapter, except trace and percolation
       scheduling, are among the last components of an optimizer to be executed in com­
       piling a program. The latter two, however, are better structured as drivers of the
       optimization process, since they may make quite broad alterations in the structure
       of a procedure and they generally benefit from being able to invoke other optimiza­
       tions to modify the code as necessary to permit more effective scheduling.


17.1   Instruction Scheduling
       Because many machines, including all Rise implementations and Intel architecture
       implementations from the 80486 on, are pipelined and expose at least some aspects
       of the pipelining to the user, it is essential that code for such machines be orga­
       nized in such a way as to take best advantage of the pipeline or pipelines that are
       present in an architecture or implementation. For example, consider the lir code in
       Figure 17.1(a). Suppose that each instruction takes one cycle, except that (1) for a
       value that is being loaded from memory into a register an additional cycle must have
       elapsed before the value is available and (2) a branch requires two cycles to reach its
       destination, but the second cycle can be used by placing an instruction in the delay
       slot after the branch. Then the sequence in Figure 17.1(a) executes correctly if the
       hardware has interlocks, and it requires seven cycles to execute. There is a stall be­
       tween the instructions in the second and third slots because the value loaded by the
       second instruction into r3 is not available immediately. Also, the branch includes a
       dead cycle, since its delay slot holds a nop. If, on the other hand, we reorder the in-
              Section 17.1     Instruction Scheduling                                                533

              1         r2 <- [rl] (4)                  r2    [rl] (4)
              2         r3 <- [rl+4](4)                 r3 <- [rl+4](4)
              3         r4 <- r2 + r3                   r5    r2 - 1
              4         r5 <- r2 - 1                    goto LI
              5         goto LI                         r4 <- r2 + r3
              6         nop
                        (a)                             (b)
  FIG. 17.1   (a) A basic block of lir code, and (b) a better schedule for it, assuming that a goto has
              a delay slot after it and that there is a one-cycle delay between initiating a load and the
              loaded value’s becoming available in the target register.


              structions as shown in Figure 17.1(b), the code still executes correctly, but it requires
              only five cycles. Now the instruction in the third slot does not use the value loaded
              by the preceding instruction, and the fifth instruction is executed while the branch is
              being completed.
                   Some architectures, such as the first commercial version of m ips , do not have
              interlocks, so the code in Figure 17.1(a) would execute incorrectly— the value loaded
              by instruction 2 would not appear in r3 until after instruction 3 had completed
              fetching the value in r3. We ignore this possibility in our discussion of scheduling,
              since all current commercial architectures have interlocks.
                   There are several issues involved in instruction scheduling, of which the most
              basic are filling branch delay slots (covered in Section 17.1.1) and scheduling the
              instructions within a basic block so as to minimize its execution time. We cover
              the latter in five sections, namely, 17.1.2 on list scheduling, 17.1.3 on automating
              generation of instruction schedulers, 17.1.4 on superscalar implementations, 17.1.5
              on the interaction between scheduling and register allocation, and 17.1.6 on cross­
              block scheduling.
                   We leave consideration of software pipelining and other more aggressive sched­
              uling methods to the following sections.


17.1.1        Branch Scheduling
              Branch scheduling refers to two things: (1) filling the delay slot(s) after a branch with
              useful instructions, and (2) covering the delay between performing a compare and
              being able to branch based on its result.
                   Branch architectures vary significantly. Several Rise architectures— such as
              pa-risc , sparc, and mips — have delayed branches with one (or in rare cases, such
              as mips -x , two) explicit delay slots. The delay slots may be filled with useful instruc­
              tions or with nops, but the latter waste execution time. Some architectures— such
              as power and PowerPC— require some number of cycles to have passed between a
              condition-determining instruction and a taken branch that uses that condition; if the
              required time has not passed by the time the branch is executed, the processor stalls
              at the branch instruction for the remainder of the delay. The advanced members
              of the Intel 386 family, such as the Pentium and Pentium Pro, also require time to
              elapse between determining a condition and branching on it.
534   Code Scheduling


      Delay Slots and Filling Them with U seful Instructions
      Some branch architectures provide a nullifying (or annulling) delayed branch that,
      according to whether the branch is taken or not and the details of the definition
      of the particular branch instruction, execute the delay-slot instruction or skip it. In
      either case, the delay instruction takes a cycle, but the delay slot may be easier to fill
      if the instruction placed in it can be nullified on one path or the other.
           In many Rises, calls are delayed also, while in others and in ciscs they are
      delayed only if the address cannot be computed far enough ahead of the branch
      to allow prefetching from the target location.
           For the sake of concreteness, we take as our basic model of branch delays
      the approach found in sparc , which includes virtually all the basic issues that
      characterize other architectures, sparc has conditional branches with a one-cycle
      delay that may be nullified by setting a bit in the instruction. Nullification causes the
      delay instruction to be executed only if a conditional branch other than a “ branch
      always” is taken and not to be executed for a “ branch always.” Jumps (which are
      unconditional) and calls have a one-cycle delay that cannot be nullified. There must
      be at least one instruction that is not a floating-point compare between a floating­
      point compare and the floating-point branch instruction that uses that condition.
      sparc -V9 includes branch instructions that compute the condition to be branched on,
      as found in the m ips and pa-r isc architectures, and conditional move instructions
      that, in some cases, eliminate the need for (forward) branches.
           It is most desirable to fill the delay slot of a branch with an instruction from the
      basic block that the branch terminates. To do this, we would modify the basic-block
      scheduling algorithm given below to first check whether any of the leaves of the
      dependence DAG for the block can be placed in the delay slot of its final branch. The
      conditions such an instruction must satisfy are as follows: (1) it must be permutable
      with the branch—that is, it must neither determine the condition being branched
      on nor change the value of a register used in computing the branch address1 or any
      other resource used by the branch, such as a condition-code field; and (2) it must not
      be a branch itself. If there is a choice of instructions from the preceding block to fill
      the delay slot, we choose one that requires only a single cycle, rather than a delayed
      load or other instruction that may stall the pipeline (depending on the instruction
      branched to or fallen through to). If there are instructions from the current block
      available, but none that take only a single cycle, we choose one that minimizes the
      likelihood of delay.
           Next, we assume that we are dealing with a conditional branch, so that there
      are both a target block and a fall-through block to be concerned with. If there is no
      instruction from the current block that can be placed in the branch’s delay slot, the
      next step is to build the DAGs for both the target block and the fall-through block
      and to attempt to find an instruction that occurs as a root in both or that can be
      register-renamed (see Section 17.4.5) in one occurrence so that it can be moved into
      the delay slot of the branch. If this is not achievable, the next choice is to find an


      1. For sparc, this is not an issue, since the target address of a conditional branch is the sum of the
      PC value and an immediate constant, but it may be an issue for some architectures.
         Section 17.1    Instruction Scheduling                                              535


         instruction that is a root in the DAG for the target block that can be moved into the
         delay slot with the nullification bit in the branch set so that the delay instruction has
         no effect if the fall-through path is taken.
              Filling the delay slot of an unconditional branch or a jump is similar to the
         process for a conditional branch. For a s p a r c “ branch alw ays,” the delay instruc­
         tion is nullified if the annul bit is set. For a jump, the delay instruction is always
         executed, and the target address is computed as the sum of two registers. Figure 17.2
         summarizes the above rules.
              Filling the delay slot of a call instruction is similar to filling the delay slot of
         a branch, but more constrained. On the other hand, there is usually at least one
         instruction that loads or copies an argument’s value into an argument register, and
         such instructions are almost always permutable with the call instruction. If there is
         no instruction from before a call that can be placed in its delay slot, there may be
         instructions following the call in the same basic block that can be placed in the delay
         slot. However, this requires caution, since the called procedure may not return to the
         point of call, so an instruction from after the call must be one that does not alter the
         effect if execution continues at an alternate return point. If there is no instruction
         at all in the basic block containing the call that can be placed in its delay slot, the
         next place to look is the procedure that is being called. O f course, whether its code
         is available or not depends on the structure of the compilation process and when
         branch scheduling is carried out. Assuming that the code is available, the simplest
         choice is the first instruction of the called procedure, since it can be copied into the
         delay slot and the call modified to target the following instruction. Other choices
         require much more coordination, since there may be multiple calls to the same
         procedure with conflicting demands for their delay slots.
              Failing all other possibilities, we fill a branch’s delay slot with a nop.

         Stall Cycles and Filling Them with Useful Instructions
         Some machines— such as p o w e r , PowerPC, and the Intel 386 architecture imple­
         mentations— require some number of cycles to have passed between a condition­
         determining instruction and a taken branch that uses that condition; if the required
         time has not passed by the time the branch is executed, the processor stalls at the
         branch instruction for the remainder of the delay, s p a r c ’s floating-point compare
         instructions and branches that depend on them also require that we schedule an
         unrelated instruction between them.
              This situation is best handled by the basic-block scheduler. We note in construct­
         ing the DAG for the block that it terminates with a conditional branch and that the
         condition branched on is computed in the block. Then, in the scheduling process, we
         place the compare as early in the schedule as we can, subject to satisfying all relevant
         dependences.

17.1.2   List Scheduling
         The general goal of basic-block scheduling is to construct a topological sort of the
         DAG that (1) produces the same results and (2) minimizes the execution time of the
         basic block.
536           Code Scheduling




  FIG. 17.2 Flowchart for the process of filling branch delay slots.
Section 17.1    Instruction Scheduling                                               537

     At the outset, note that basic-block scheduling is an NP-hard problem, even with
a very simple formulation of the problem, so we must seek an effective heuristic,
rather than exact, approach. The algorithm we give has a worst-case running time
of 0(w2), where n is the number of instructions in the basic block, but it is usually
linear in practice. The overall performance of list scheduling is usually dominated by
the time to construct the dependence DAG (see Section 9.2), which is also 0 (n 2) in
the worst case but is usually linear or slightly slower in practice.
     Now, suppose that we have a dependence DAG for a basic block, as described
in Section 9.2. Before proceeding to a method for scheduling it, we must consider
the handling of calls. If the call instruction has a delay slot in the architecture under
consideration, then we need to be able to choose an instruction to fill it, preferably
from before the call (as discussed in Section 17.1.1). Calls typically have an implicit
set of registers (determined by software convention) that are required to be saved
and restored by the caller around a call. Also, lacking interprocedural data-flow
information and alias analysis (see Sections 19.2 and 19.4), we have no way of
knowing which storage locations might be affected by a called procedure, except
what the semantics of the language being compiled guarantees; e.g., we may know
only that the caller’s local variables are invisible to the callee (as in Fortran), so the
set of memory-reference instructions before a call that can be permuted with it may
be small. We could consider a call to be a basic-block boundary and build separate
DAGs for the instructions that precede the call and for those that follow it, but this
might reduce our freedom to rearrange instructions, and so result in slower code.
Alternatively, we can take the implicit set of caller-saved registers into account in the
definition of the C o n flic t ( ) function (see Section 9.2), serialize all other storage
accesses (or at least those that might be affected) with respect to a call, specially
mark the instructions that can be put into the delay slot of the call, and combine the
generated nop following the call into the node for the call. The best choices for an
instruction to fill the delay slot are those that move argument values into the registers
that are used for parameter passing. For example, suppose we have the l i r code in
Figure 17.3 and that registers r l through r7 are used to pass parameters. We use
asterisks to mark the nodes corresponding to instructions that can be moved into
the delay slot of the call. Then we can schedule this block’s instructions in the order

    1, 3, 4, 2, 6

and we have succeeded in replacing the nop by a useful instruction.
     Several instruction-level transformations can improve the latitude available to
instruction scheduling. For example, the two sequences in Figure 17.4 have the same
effect, but one of them may produce a better schedule than the other in a particular
situation. This can be accounted for in scheduling by a subroutine that recognizes
such situations and makes both alternatives available to try, but this strategy needs
to be carefully controlled, as it can lead to an exponential increase in the number of
possible schedules.
     The list approach to scheduling begins by traversing the DAG from the leaves
toward the roots, labeling each node with the maximum possible delay from that
node to the end of the block. Let ExecTime(w) be the number of cycles required to
execute the instruction associated with node n. We compute the function
538           Code Scheduling



                                                       0
              1     r8 * - [rl2+8] (4)
              2     rl * - r8 + 1
              3     r2 •«-2
              4     call rl4,r31
              5     nop
              6     r9     rl + 1




              (a)                                       (b)
                                                              0
  FIG. 17.3 (a) A basic block including a call, and (b) its dependence DAG. Asterisks mark nodes
            corresponding to instructions that can be moved into the delay slot of the call.

              Id  [r2+4],r3              add 4,r2,r2
              add 4,r2,r2                Id  [r2],r3
              (a)                        (b)
  FIG. 17.4 Two equivalent pairs of instructions. Either might provide more latitude in scheduling
            than the other in a particular situation.


                    Delay: Node —> in te g e r
              defined by (where DagSuccO', D AG) is the set of successors of i in the DAG)
                                 | ExecTime(w)                              if n is a leaf
                         y       |      max         L ate_ D elay («,ra)    otherwise
                                  meDagSucc(«, DAG)
              where Late_D elay(«,m ) = Laten cy(Llnst(w ) ,2 ,L In st(ra ) ,1) + Delay(ra). To
              do so, we proceed as shown in Figure 17.5, where
                    PostOrd: array [ 1 • • w] of Node
              is a postorder listing of the n nodes in the dependence DAG, and L In st (/) is the l i r
              instruction represented by node i in the DAG.
                   Next, we traverse the DAG from the roots toward the leaves, selecting nodes
              to schedule and keeping track of the current time (CurTime), which begins with the
              value zero, and the earliest time each node (ETime [«]) should be scheduled to avoid
              a stall. Sched is the sequence of nodes that have already been scheduled; Cands is
              the set of candidates at each point, i.e., the nodes that have not yet been scheduled,
              but all of whose predecessors have been. Two subsets of Cands are used: MCands, the
              set of candidates with the maximum delay time to the end of the basic block; and
              ECands, the set of nodes in MCands whose earliest start times are less than or equal
              to the current time. The i c a n code is shown in Figure 17.6. The following functions
              are used in the algorithm:
            Section 17.1         Instruction Scheduling                                              539


            Leaf: Node — > boolean
            Delay, ExecTime: Node —> integer
            LInst: Node —> LIRInst
            DagSucc: (Node x Dag) — > set of Node
            Heuristics: (set of Node) —> Node
            procedure Compute_Delay(nodes,PostOrd)
               nodes: in integer
               PostOrd: in array [1**nodes] of Node
            begin
                i, d, Id: integer
               n: Node
               for i := 1 to nodes do
                   if Leaf(PostOrd[i]) then
                      Delay(PostOrd[i]) := ExecTime(PostOrd[i])
                   else
                      d := 0
                      for each n e DagSucc(PostOrd[i],Dag) do
                         Id := Latency(LInst(PostOrd[i]),2,LInst(n),1) + Delay(n)
                         d := max (ld,d)
                      od
                      Delay(PostOrd[i]) := d
                   fi
               od
            end     II Compute.Delay

FIG. 17.5 Computing the Delay () function.

       1.   Post .Order (D ) returns an array whose elements are a topological sort of the nodes
            of the DAG D (the index of the first element of the array is 1 and the index of the
            last is ID . Nodes I).
       2.   H e u r is t ic s ( ) applies our chosen heuristics to the current set of candidates; note
            that it may require information other than the current candidates to make choices.
       3.   In st O') returns the instruction represented by node i in the dependence DAG.
       4.   Latency U\                is the number of latency cycles incurred by beginning execu­
            tion of / 2 5s   cycle while executing cycle n\ of 0 , as defined in Section 9.2.
       5.   DagSucc 0 , D ) , which is described above.
                As an example of the scheduling algorithm, consider the dependence DAG in
            Figure 17.7 and suppose that ExecTime (6) = 2 and ExecTime(« ) = 1 for all other
            nodes n and that Latency ( I \ , 2 , 1 2 ,1) = 1 for all pairs of instructions 11 and I2 . The
            Delay ( ) function is
                 Node        Delay

                 1           5
                 2           4
                 3           4
                 4           3
                 5           1
                 6           2
540            Code Scheduling

               DAG = record {Nodes, Roots: set of Node,
                             Edges: set of (Node x Node),
                             Label: (Node x Node) — > integer}

               procedure Schedule(nodes,Dag,Roots,DagSucc,DagPred,ExecTime)
                  nodes: in integer
                  Dag: in DAG
                  Roots: in set of Node
                  DagSucc, DagPred: in (Node x DAG) — > set of Node
                  ExecTime: in Node — > integer
               begin
                  i, j, m, n, MaxDelay, CurTime := 0: integer
                  Cands := Roots, ECands, MCands: set of Node
                  ETime: array [1-*nodes] of integer
                  Delay: Node — > integer
                  Sched := []: sequence of Node
                  Delay := Compute_Delay(nodes,Post_Order(Dag))
                  for i := 1 to nodes do
                     ETime[i] :* 0
                  od

  FIG . 17.6   Instruction scheduling algorithm.


               and the steps in the scheduling process are as follows:
         1.    Initially, CurTime = 0, Cands = { 1 , 3 } , Sch ed = [ ] , and ETime M   = 0 for all nodes
               n. The value o f M axDelay is 4, and MCands = ECands = {3 > .

         2.    N od e 3 is selected; Sch ed = [ 3 ], Cands = { 1 } , CurTime = 1, and ETime [4] = 1.

         3.    Since IC ands I = 1, the single node in it, 1, is selected next. So, Sch ed = [ 3 ,1 ] ,
               Cands = { 2 } , CurTime = 2, ETime [2] = 1, and ETime [4] = 4.

         4.    Since ICands I = 1 again, node 2 is selected, so Sch ed = [ 3 , 1 , 2 ] , Cands = { 4 } ,
               CurTime = 3, and ETime [4] = 4.

         5.    A gain I Cands I = 1 , so node 4 is selected; as a result, Sch ed = [ 3 , 1 , 2 , 4 ] ,
               Cands = { 5 , 6 } , CurTime = 4, ETime [5] = 6, and ETime [6] = 4.

         6.    N ow , M axDelay = 2 and MCands = { 6 } , so node 6 is selected; as a result,
               Sch ed = [ 3 , 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 ] , C ands = { 5 } , CurTime = 5, and ETime [5] = 6 .

         7.    Since there is only one candidate left (node 5), it is selected, and the algorithm
               term inates.

               The final schedule is
                   Sch ed = [ 3 , 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 , 5 ]

               and the schedule requires 6 cycles, which happens to be the minimum possible value.
                   A version of this algorithm has been shown to produce a schedule that is within
               a factor of 2 of optimal for a machine with one or more identical pipelines and
            Section 17.1   Instruction Scheduling                              541

                while Cands * 0 do
                   MaxDelay := -°°
                   for each m e Cands do
                      MaxDelay := max(MaxDelay,Delay(m))
                   od
                   MCands := {m e Cands where Delay(m) = MaxDelay}
                   ECands := {m e MCands where ETime[m] ^ CurTime}
                   if |MCandsI = 1 then
                      n := ♦MCands
                   elif |ECandsI = 1 then
                      n := ♦ECands
                   elif IECands| > 1 then
                      n := Heuristics(ECands)
                   else
                      n := Heuristics(MCands)
                   fi
                   Sched ®= [n]
                   Cands -= {n}
                   CurTime += ExecTime(n)
                   for each i e DagSucc(n,Dag) do
                      if !3j e integer (Schedlj=i) &
                         Vm e DagPred(i,Dag) (3j e integer (Schedlj=m)) then
                         Cands u= {i}
                      fi
                      ETime[i] := max(ETime[n],
                         CurTime+Latency(LInst(n),2,LInst(i),1))
                   od
                od
               return Sched
            end     || Schedule

FIG. 17.6   (continued)




FIG. 17.7   An example dependence DAG.
542        Code Scheduling


           within a factor of p + 1 for a machine that has p pipelines with different functions.
           In practice, it almost always does much better than this upper bound.
               A variety of heuristics can be used to make practical choices when IMCands I > 1
           or lECands I > 1. These include the following:

      1. Select from MCands the node n with the least value of ETime M .
      2.   If the architecture has p > 1 pipelines and there are candidates for each pipeline, bias
           selection toward candidates for pipelines that have not had instructions scheduled
           recently.
      3.   Bias selection toward candidates that result in the maximal number of new candi­
           dates being added to Cands.
      4.   Bias selection toward instructions that free a register or that avoid using an addi­
           tional register, thus reducing register pressure.
      5.   Select the candidate that came first in the original ordering of the basic block.

           Smotherman et al. survey the types of DAGs that are used in instruction schedul­
           ing and present a long list of heuristics, some subset of which is used in each of six
           distinct implemented schedulers they describe (see Section 17.8 for further reading).
           Gibbons and Muchnick construct the dependence DAG from the leaves upward to­
           ward the roots, i.e., beginning with the last instruction in a basic block and working
           backward, so as to handle the carry-borrow bits in p a - r i s c most effectively. The
           carry-borrow bits are defined frequently but are used relatively rarely, so building
           the DAG from the bottom up allows uses of them to be noted first and attention to
           be directed to definitions of them only when there is an upwards exposed use.
                Note that some work on instruction scheduling uses a different notion of the
           dependence DAG. In particular, Hennessy and Gross use a so-called machine-level
           DAG that is an adaptation of the DAG intermediate-code form discussed in Sec­
           tion 4.9.3. The adaptation involves using machine registers and memory locations
           as the leaf nodes and labels, and machine instructions as the interior nodes. This
           DAG has fewer explicit constraints represented in it, as the example in Figure 17.8
           shows. For the l i r code in (a), Hennessy and Gross would construct the machine-
           level DAG in (b); our dependence DAG is shown in (c). Assuming that neither r l nor
           r4 is live at the end of the basic block, the machine-level DAG admits two correct
           schedules, namely,

                 1,2, 3 ,4

           and

                 3 ,4 ,1 ,2

           while the dependence DAG allows only the first of them. At the same time, the
           machine-level DAG allows incorrect schedules, such as

                 1 ,3 , 2 ,4
             Section 17.1    Instruction Scheduling                                            543

                                                                             ©      1

             1
             2
             3
                   rl <- [rl2+0](4)
                   r4 <- rl + 1
                   r4 <- [rl2+4](4)
                                                  © ©       1   1            T
             4     rl <- r4 - 1

                                                  © ©                        ©      1


                                                                             ©
             (a)                                      (b)                     (c)
  FIG. 17.8 (a) A lir basic block, (b) Hennessy and Gross’s machine-level DAG, and (c) our
            dependence DAG for it.


             unless rules are added to the scheduling process, as Hennessy and Gross do, to
             restrict schedules to what they call “ safe positions.” We see no particular advantage
             in this approach over the DAG definition used above, especially as it raises the
             computational complexity of instruction scheduling to 0 ( « 4).

17.1.3       Automating Instruction-Scheduler Generation
             Another issue in instruction scheduling is that the production of schedulers from
             machine descriptions can and has been automated. This is important because even
             a compiler for a single architecture may (and almost always does) need to deal with
             different implementations of the architecture. The implementations frequently differ
             from each other enough that a very good schedule for one can be no better than
             mediocre for another.
                   Thus, it is important to be able to generate instruction schedulers from imple­
             mentation descriptions, taking as much of an implementation’s scheduling-related
             uniqueness into account as possible. Perhaps the best known and certainly the most
             widely distributed of such scheduler generators is the one found in gcc, the GNU C
             compiler. It provides the compiler writer with the facilities necessary to write ma­
             chine descriptions that may have their own writer-defined properties and a great
             degree of flexibility in how those properties interact. Provided with a very detailed
             description of an implementation’s pipeline structure, structural hazards, delays,
             low-level parallelization rules, and so on, it produces a remarkably effective sched­
             uler.

17.1.4       Scheduling for Superscalar Implementations
             Scheduling for a superscalar implementation needs to model the functional organi­
             zation of the CPU as accurately as possible, for example, by biasing the heuristics
544           Code Scheduling


              that are used to take into account that a particular implementation has two integer
              pipelines, two floating-point pipelines, and a branch unit (as in some implementa­
              tions of power), or that a pair of instructions can be initiated simultaneously only if
              it is doubleword-aligned (as required by the Intel i860). The latter requirement can
              be handled easily by inserting nops to make each basic block begin on a doubleword
              boundary or, with more work, by tracking the boundary each instruction pair would
              be aligned on and correcting it to doubleword alignment if necessary.
                    For superscalar systems, scheduling also needs to be biased to organize instruc­
              tions into groups that can be issued simultaneously. This can be done by a grouping
              heuristic, e.g., a greedy algorithm that fills as many of the available slots as possi­
              ble with ready instructions, as follows. Suppose that the processor in question has
              n execution units P i , . . . , Pn that may operate in parallel and that each unit P/ may
              execute instructions in class P C la ssO ). We model the functional units by n copies
              of the data structures in the list scheduling algorithm in Figure 17.6 and determine
              the class of a particular instruction inst by IC la ss(m s £ ), i.e., instruction inst can be
              executed by execution unit i if and only if PC lassO ') = IC la ss(m s£ ). Then the list
              scheduling algorithm can be modified to produce a straightforward scheduler for a
              superscalar system.
                    Flowever, remember that greedy scheduling may not be optimal, as the example
              in Figure 17.9 shows. We assume that the processor has two pipelines, one of which
              can execute both integer and floating-point operations and the other of which can do
              integer and memory operations; each operation has a latency of one cycle. Suppose
              that the only dependence between the instructions is that the FltO p must precede the
              IntLd. Then the greedy schedule in Figure 17.9(a) has a latency of two cycles, while
              the equally greedy one in Figure 17.9(b) requires three cycles.
                    Also, one must be careful not to use too much lookahead in such heuristics,
              since all nontrivial instances of instruction scheduling are at least NP-hard. Such
              scheduling may be improved by scheduling across control-flow constructs, i.e., by
              using extended basic blocks and/or reverse extended basic blocks in scheduling, as
              discussed in Section 17.1.6, or more powerful global techniques. In an extended
              basic block, for example, this might involve moving an instruction from a basic
              block to both of its successor blocks to improve instruction grouping.




              IntFlt   IntMem        IntFlt   IntMem

              FltOp    FltLd         FltOp    IntOp
              IntOp    IntLd                   IntLd
                                              FltLd
              (a)                    (b)

  FIG. 17.9 Two greedy schedules for a superscalar processor, one of which (a) is optimal and the
            other of which (b) is not.
              Section 17.1     Instruction Scheduling                                           545

              1       rl <- [rl2+0](4)               rl <- [rl2+0] (4)
              2       r2 <- [rl2+4] (4)              r2 <- [rl2+4] (4)
              3       rl    rl + r2                  r3 <- rl + r2
              4       [rl2,0] (4) <- rl              [rl2,0](4) *- r3
              5       rl <- [rl2+8](4)               r4 <-     CN00
                                                                 +
              6       r2 <- [rl2+12](4)              r5 <- [rl2+12](4)
              7       r2 <- rl + r2                  r6 <- r4 + r5
                      (a)                            (b)
 FIG. 17.10 (a) A basic block of lir code with a register assignment that constrains scheduling
              unnecessarily, and (b) a better register assignment for it.




17.1.5        Other Issues in Basic-Block Scheduling
             The instruction scheduling approach discussed above is designed, among other
             things, to cover the delay between the initiation of fetching from a data cache and
             the receipt of the loaded value in a register. It does not take into account the possi­
             bility that the datum being loaded might not be in the cache and so might need to
             be fetched from main memory or from a second-level cache, incurring a significantly
             longer and unpredictable stall. Eggers and her colleagues ([KerE93] and [LoEg95])
             present an approach called balanced scheduling that is designed to account for such
             a possibility. Their algorithm spreads the latency of a series of loads occurring in a
             basic block over the other instructions that are available to schedule between them.
             This is becoming increasingly important as the acceleration of processor speed con­
             tinues to outrun the acceleration of memory speeds.
                  The interaction between register allocation and instruction scheduling can
             present serious problems. Consider the example in Figure 17.10(a), with the de­
             pendence DAG shown in Figure 17.11(a). Because registers r l and r2 are reused
             immediately, we cannot schedule any of instructions 5 through 7 before any of
             1 through 4. If we change the register allocation to use different registers in in­
             structions 5 through 7, as shown in Figure 17.10(b), the dependence DAG becomes
             the one shown in Figure 17.11(b), and the latitude available for scheduling is sig­
             nificantly increased. In particular, we can schedule the loads so that no stalls are
             incurred, as shown in Figure 17.12, in comparison to the original register assign­
             ment, which allowed no reordering at all.
                  To achieve this, we allocate quantities to symbolic registers during code gen­
             eration and then perform register allocation late in the compilation process. We
             do scheduling immediately before register allocation (i.e., with symbolic registers)
             and repeat it immediately after, if any spill code has been generated. This is the ap­
             proach taken in the IBM X L compilers for pow er and PowerPC (see Section 21.2),
             the Hewlett-Packard compilers for pa -r is c , and the Sun compilers for sparc (see
             Section 21.1); it has been shown in practice to yield better schedules and better reg­
             ister allocations than a single scheduling pass that is performed either before or after
             register allocation.
546           Code Scheduling




 FIG. 17.11 Dependence DAGs for the basic blocks in Figure 17.10.


              rl   <-   [ r l 2 + 0 ] (4 )
              r2        [ r l 2 + 4 ] (4 )
              r4 < -    [ r l 2 + 8 ] (4 )
              r5   <-   [ r l 2 + 1 2 ] (4 )
              r3 < - r l + r2
              [ r l 2 + 0 ] (4 ) < - r 3
              r6 < - r4 + r5

 FIG. 17.12 A scheduling of the basic block in Figure 17.10(b) that covers all the load delays.


17.1.6         Scheduling Across Basic-Block Boundaries
              While some programs have very large basic blocks that present many opportunities
              for scheduling to improve code quality, it is frequently the case that blocks are too
              short for scheduling to make any, or very much, difference. Thus, it is often desirable
              to make basic blocks longer, as loop unrolling does (Section 17.4.3), or to extend
              instruction scheduling across basic-block boundaries. One method for doing this in
              loops is software pipelining, which we discuss in Section 17.4.
                   Another approach is to schedule basic blocks, as much as possible, before their
              successors and to take into account in the initial state of scheduling a successor block
              any latency that is left over at the conclusion of scheduling its predecessors.
                   Another method is to transform the code so as to enable better coverage of
              branch delays. In particular, Golumbic and Rainish [GolR90] discuss three simple
              transformations that help to absorb the three-cycle delay between a compare (cmp)
              and a taken conditional branch (be) and the four-cycle delay for an untaken con­
              ditional branch in a cmp-bc-b sequence in power. For example, the following deals
             Section 17.2      Speculative Loads and Boosting                                          547

             LI: in stl                  LI: in stl
                 inst2                   L3: inst2

                   cmp crO, cond             cmp crO, ! cond
                   in st« -l                 in st« -l
                   instw                     instw
                   be crO,Ll                 be     crO,L2
                                             in stl
                                             b      L3
                                         L2: . . .
             (a)                         (b)
FIG. 17.13 (a) power loop with a one-cycle uncovered cmp-bc delay, and (b) transformed code that
           covers it.


            with loop-closing branches. Suppose that we have a loop with a one-cycle uncovered
            delay, as shown in Figure 17.13(a). We can cover the delay by changing the cmp to
            test the negation of the original condition (indicated by ! cond) and the be to exit
            the loop, replicating the first instruction of the loop after the be, and then inserting
            an unconditional branch to the second instruction of the loop after the replicated
            instruction, resulting in the code in Figure 17.13(b).2 The obvious generalization
            works for an uncovered delay of two or three cycles.
                 References to several approaches to scheduling across basic-block boundaries
            are given in Section 17.8.



17.2         Speculative Loads and Boosting
            Speculative loading is a mechanism that increases the freedom available to a sched­
            uler and that provides a way to hide some of the latency inherent in satisfying a
            load from memory rather than from a cache. A speculative load is a load instruction
            that does not incur any memory exceptions until one uses the quantity loaded. Such
            a load may be issued before it is known whether the address it generates is valid
            or not—if it is later found to be invalid, one simply avoids using the loaded value.
            Such loads are found in the Multiflow architecture, sparc -V9, and PowerPC, among
            others.
                For example, loading the next element of a linked list can be initiated with a
            speculative load before testing whether the end of the list has been reached—if the
            end has been reached, the instruction that uses the data loaded is not executed, so
            no problem occurs. A mir example of this is shown in Figure 17.14. Part (a) is a
            typical sample of a function to search a linked list for a particular value. In part (b),
            the assignment p i ^ s p p *.n e x t in the line labeled L2 moves p i one record ahead


             2. This is an instance of the window-scheduling approach to software pipelining discussed below
             in Section 17.4.1.
548            Code Scheduling


               search:                                         search:
                   receive ptr (val)                                receive ptr (val)
                   receive ptr (val)                                receive v (val)
                   p <- ptr                                         p <- ptr
                                                                L2: pi <-sp p*.next
              L2: if p*.val = v goto LI                             if p*.val = v goto LI
                  p <- p*.next
                  if p != NIL goto L2                               if P = NIL goto L3
                                                                    p * - pi
                  return 0                                          goto L2
              LI: return 1                                      LI: return 1
                                                                L3: return 0
               (a)                                            (b)
 FIG. 17.14 (a) A mir routine that searches a list, and (b) the same routine with the fetching of the
            next element boosted to occur before testing whether the current element is the end of
            the list.

              of the one we are checking (pointed to by p). As long as the assignment to p i is a
              speculative load (marked by the sp after the arrow), no error occurs.
                   Thus, a speculative load may be moved ahead of a test that determines its
              validity, i.e., from one basic block to a previous one or from one iteration of a
              loop to an earlier one. Such code motion is known as boosting, and techniques for
              accomplishing it are described by Rogers and Li (see Section 17.8 for references).


17.3           Speculative Scheduling
              Speculative scheduling is a technique that generalizes boosting of speculative loads
              to moving other types of instructions toward the entry of a procedure, across one or
              more branches and, particularly, out of loops. It takes two forms: safe speculative
              scheduling, in which the moved instruction can do no harm when it is executed in
              the location it is moved to (except, perhaps, slowing down the computation); and
              unsafe speculative scheduling, in which the moved instructions must be protected by
              a conditional that determines whether they are legal in their new position.
                   Techniques for speculative scheduling are too new and, as yet, unproven in their
              impact on performance for us to do more than mention the subject and provide
              references (see Section 17.8). In particular, the work of Ebcioglu et al. addresses
              speculative scheduling and its mirror operation, unspeculation. Papers by Golumbic
              and Rainish and by Bernstein and Rodeh discuss earlier work in this area.


17.4           Software Pipelining
              Software pipelining is an optimization that can improve the loop-executing perfor­
              mance of any system that allows instruction-level parallelism, including VLIW and
              superscalar systems, but also one-scalar implementations that allow, e.g., integer and
              floating-point instructions to be executing at the same time but not to be initiated
             Section 17.4     Software Pipelining                                              549


             at the same time. It works by allowing parts of several iterations of a loop to be in
             process at the same time, so as to take advantage of the parallelism available in the
             loop body.
                   For example, suppose that the instructions in the loop in Figure 17.15 have the
             latencies shown; then each iteration requires 12 cycles, as shown by the dashed line
             in the pipeline diagram in Figure 17.16, on a hypothetical one-scalar implementation
             that has one integer unit and one floating-point unit (with its execution cycles
             indicated by the darker shading), with floating-point loads and stores carried out
             by the integer unit. Note that the six-cycle issue latency between the f adds and the
             s t f could be reduced if we could overlap the preceding iteration’s store with the add
             for the current iteration. Copying the load and add from the first iteration and the
             load from the second iteration out ahead of the loop allows us to begin the loop with
             the store for one iteration, followed by the add for the next iteration, and then by
             the load for the second following iteration. Doing so adds three instructions before




                                    Issue      Result
                                    latency    latency

                ldf    [rl] ,f0     1           1
               fadds fO,f 1 ,f2     1           7
                stf   f2, [rl]      6           3
                sub   rl,4,rl       1           1
                cmp   rl ,0         1           1
               bg     L             1           2
               nop                  1           1


FIG. 17.15 A simple sparc loop with assumed issue and result latencies.




FIG. 17.16 Pipeline diagram for the loop body in Figure 17.15.
550            C o d e Sch ed ulin g



                                        Issue       Result
                                        latency     latency

                  ldf      [rl],fO
                  fadds fO,f1,f2
                  ldf      [rl-4] ,f0
               L: stf     f2, [rl]      1           3
                  fadds fO,f1,f2        1           7
                  ldf      [rl-8],f0    1           1
                  cmp     rl,8          1           1
                  bg      L             1           2
                  sub     rl,4,rl       1           1
                  stf     f2, [rl]
                  sub     rl,4,rl
                  fadds fO,f1,f2
                  stf     f2, [rl]

 FIG . 17.17   The result of software pipelining the loop in Figure 17.15, with issue and result latencies.




 FIG. 17.18    Pipeline diagram for the loop body in Figure 17.17.



               the loop and requires us to add five instructions after the loop to com plete the last
               tw o iterations, resulting in the code show n in Figure 17.17. It reduces the cycle count
               for the loop body to seven, reducing execution time per iteration by 5 /1 2 or about
               4 2 % , as show n by the dashed line in Figure 17.1 8 . As long as the loop is alw ays
               iterated at least three tim es, the tw o form s have the sam e effect.
                     A lso, seven cycles is the m inim um execution time for the loop, unless we unroll
               it, since the f a d d s requires seven cycles. If we were to unroll it, we could overlap
               tw o or m ore f a d d ss and increase the perform ance further. Thus, softw are pipelining
               and loop unrolling are usually com plem entary. O n the other hand, we w ould need to
             Section 17.4    Software Pipelining                                               551

             use additional registers, because, e.g., two f addss executing at the same time would
             have to use different source and target registers.
                  Since software pipelining moves a fixed number of iterations of a loop out of
             the loop body, we must either know in advance that the loop is repeated at least
             that many times, or we must generate code that tests this, if possible, at run time
             and that chooses to execute either a software-pipelined version of the loop or one
             that is not. Of course, for some loops it is not possible to determine the number
             of iterations they take without executing them, and software pipelining cannot be
             applied to such loops.
                  Another consideration is the extent to which we can disambiguate memory
             references, so as to minimize the constraints on pipelining, as discussed in Chapter 9.
             The better we can do so, the more freedom we have in pipelining and, hence,
             generally the better the schedule we can produce.
                  In the next two subsections, we discuss two approaches to software pipelining,
             window scheduling and unroll-and-compact pipelining. The first is simpler to imple­
             ment, while the second will generally result in better schedules.


17.4.1       Window Scheduling
             An approach to software pipelining called window scheduling derives its name from
             its conceptual model of the pipelining process—it makes two connected copies of the
             dependence DAG for the body of a loop, which must be a single basic block, and it
             runs a window down the copies. The window at each point contains one complete
             copy of the loop body; the instructions above and below the window (after the initial
             state) become the pipelined loop’s prologue and epilogue, respectively. For example,
             the dependence DAG in Figure 17.19(a) becomes the double or window-scheduling
             DAG in Figure 17.19(b) with a possible window indicated by the dashed lines. As the
             window is moved down the copies, we try the various schedules that result, searching




             (a)                         (b)
 FIG. 17.19 (a) Dependence DAG for a sample loop body, and (b) double version of it used in
            window scheduling, with dashed lines showing a possible window.
552                Code Scheduling

                   DAG = record {Nodes, Roots: set of integer,
                                 Edges: set of (integer x integer),
                                 Label: set of (integer x integer) — > integer}

                   procedure Window.Schedule(n,Inst,Limit,MinStall)
                        n, Limit, MinStall: in integer
                        Inst: inout array [l-*n] of LIRInst
                   begin
                      Dag, Window, Prol, Epi: DAG
                       Stall, N: integer
                       Sched, BestSched, ProS, EpiS: sequence of integer
                       Dag := Build_DAG(n,Inst)
                       if Schedulable(Dag) then
                          Dag := Double_DAG(Dag)
                          Window := Init_Window(Dag)
                          BestSched := SP_Schedule(I Window.Nodes I,Window,Window.Roots,
                              MinStall,ExecTime)
                          Stall := MinStall
                          repeat
                              if Move_Window(Dag,Window) then
                                 Sched := SP_Schedule(I Window.Nodes I,Window,Window.
                                    Roots,MinStall,ExecTime)
                                 if Stall < MinStall then
                                    BestSched :* Sched
                                    MinStall := min(MinStall,Stall)
                                 fi
                              fi
                          until Stall = 0 V Stall £ Limit * MinStall
                          Prol :* Get_Prologue(Dag,Window)
                          Epi:= Get.Epilogue(Dag,Window)
                          ProS :* SP.Schedule(IProl.Nodes I,Prol,Prol.Roots,MinStall,ExectTme)
                          EpiS :* SP.Schedule(IEpi.Nodes I,Epi,Epi.Roots,MinStall,ExectTme)
                          N := Loop_Ct_Inst(n,Inst)
                          Decr_Loop_Ct(Inst[N])
                       fi
                   end      II Window.Schedule

 F IG . 1 7 .2 0   A lgorithm for w indow scheduling.



                   fo r on es th a t d e c re ase the o v erall laten cy o f the lo o p body. We d o w in d o w sch ed u lin g
                   a t the sa m e tim e a s oth e r in stru ctio n sch ed u lin g a n d u se the b a sic-b lo ck sch ed u ler to
                   sch ed u le the lo o p body.
                          F igu re 1 7 .2 0 is an o u tlin e o f the i c a n alg o rith m fo r w in d o w sch ed u lin g. Its in put
                   c o n sists o f I n s t [1 • * n ] , the seq u en ce o f in stru ctio n s th at m ak e u p the b a sic b lock
                   th a t is the lo o p b o d y to be p ip elin ed . It first co n stru c ts the depen den ce D A G fo r the
                   b a sic b lo ck (u sin g B u ild _ D A G ( ) , w hich is given in F igu re 9 .6 ) an d sto res it in Dag
                   an d u ses S c h e d u l a b l e ( ) to d eterm in e w h eth er it can be w in d o w sch ed u led , i.e.,
                   w h eth er it h a s a lo o p in d ex th a t is in crem en ted ex a c tly on ce in the lo o p b o d y an d the
                   lo o p is ex ecu ted a t le ast tw ice. If so , the alg o rith m uses the fo llo w in g in fo rm atio n :
     Section 17.4     Software Pipelining                                                  553


1.   Dag records the window-scheduling or double DAG (constructed by Double_DAG( ))
     that is used in the window-scheduling process.
2.   Window indicates the current placement of the window.
3.   Sched records the (basic-block) schedule for the DAG currently in the window.
4.   S t a l l is the number of stall cycles associated with Sched.
5.   M in Stall records the minimum number of stall cycles in any schedule tried so far.
6.   BestSched is the last DAG generated that has the minimal number of stall cycles.

     Lim it is chosen by the compiler writer to guide the window scheduler in deciding
     how far from the best schedule achieved so far it should wander before giving up
     the process of attempting to find a better schedule. Routines used in the window­
     scheduling process are as follows:

1.   SP_Schedule( ) is constructed from the basic-block scheduler given in Figure 17.6.
     Specifically, SP.Schedule ( N , D a g , R , stall, E T ) computes the functions DagSucc ( )
     and DagPred( ), calls Sch edule(N ,D <zg,R ,D agSucc,D agP red,ET ), sets stall to
     the number of stall cycles in the schedule Sched produced, and returns Sched as its
     value.
2.   Move_Window( ) selects an instruction in the double DAG and moves the window
     down over it (assuming that there is space remaining to move it) and returns tru e if
     it moved the window and f a l s e otherwise.
3.   Get .P rologue ( ) and G et.E pilogu e ( ) extract as DAGs the portions of the double
     DAG above and below the window, respectively.
4.   L o o p .C t.In st ( ) determines which instruction tests the loop counter.
5.   D ecr.Loop.Ct ( ) modifies that instruction to do one less iteration. This is appro­
     priate because the algorithm, as described so far, moves only a single iteration out
     of the loop, so the loop itself does parts of two successive iterations and, overall,
     does one less iteration than the original loop body did. Thus we need code to do one
     iteration outside the loop, as extracted by Get .P rologu e ( ) and Get .E p ilo g u e ( ).
6.   ExecTime(w) is the number of cycles required to execute the instruction associated
     with node n in the DAG.

          The window-scheduling algorithm can easily be generalized to allow more
     than two iterations to be in process inside the pipelined loop by repeatedly ap­
     plying it to the new loop body that results from it. For example, starting with
     the loop in Figure 17.15, the window-scheduling DAG for the loop body is given
     in Figure 17.21(a). Moving the window below the ld f results in the code in Fig­
     ure 17.22(a) and the window-scheduling DAG in Figure 17.21(b). Moving the
     window down over the fad d s results, in turn, in the code in Figure 17.22(b) and
     the window-scheduling DAG in Figure 17.21(c). Finally, moving the window down
     over the ld f a second time results in the code in Figure 17.17.
          Note that window scheduling can easily be combined with loop unrolling, which
     is useful because it almost always increases the freedom available to the scheduler:
554            C o d e Sch ed u lin g



                     ldf



                 fadds



                     stf



                     sub



                     ldf



                 fadds



                     stf



                     sub

               (a)                      (b)                                (c)
 FIG . 17.21   Double DAGs for successive versions of the loop in Figures 17.15 and 17.22 during the
               window-scheduling process.


                                                  ldf   [rl],f0
                     ldf   [rl],f0                fadds fO,f1,f2
                     fadds fO,f1,f2            L: stf   f2, [rl]
                     stf   f2, [rl]               ldf   [rl-4],f0
                     ldf   [rl-4],f0              fadds fO,f1,f2
                     sub   rl,4,rl                sub   rl,4,rl
                     cmp   rl ,4                  cmp   rl ,4
                     *>g   L                      *>g   L
                     nop                          nop
                     fadds fO,f1,f2               stf   f2,[rl-4]
                     stf   f2, [rl-4]             sub   rl,4,rl
                     sub   rl,4,rl
               (a)                             (b)
 FIG . 17.22   Intermediate versions of the loop in Figure 17.15.
             Section 17.4     Software Pipelining                                             555


             A      L: Id         [i3],f0
             B          fmuls     f31,f0 ,f1
             C          Id        [iO],f2
             D          fadds     f2,f1,f2
             E          add       i3,i5,i3
             F         deccc      il
             G          St        f2, [iO]
             H          add       i0,i5,i0
             I         bpos       L
             J         nop

 FIG. 17.23 Another example loop for software pipelining.

             A




                       H              F


                              I
 FIG. 17.24 Dependence DAG for the body of the loop in Figure 17.23.

             instead of using Double_DAG( ) to make one copy of the loop body, we replace it
             with a routine that, for an unrolling factor of «, makes n — 1 additional copies.
             We then simply do window scheduling over the resulting n copies. This, combined
             with variable expansion and register renaming, can frequently produce higher per­
             formance because it makes more instructions available to schedule.

17.4.2       Unroll-and-Compact Software Pipelining
             An alternate approach to software pipelining unrolls copies of the loop body and
             searches for a repeating pattern in the instructions that are being initiated at each
             step. If it finds such a pattern, it constructs the pipelined loop body from the pat­
             tern and the prologue and epilogue from the instructions preceding and following
             the pattern, respectively. For example, suppose we have the sparc code shown in
             Figure 17.23, whose loop body has the dependence DAG shown in Figure 17.24
             (assuming a three-cycle latency for the f adds and fmuls instructions and ignoring
             the nop in the delay slot of the branch). Then Figure 17.25 shows a possible uncon­
             strained greedy schedule of the iterations of the loop, assuming that the instructions
556           Code Scheduling



                                Iteration step
              Time    1    2                3        4

                  1   ACF
                  2   BE
                  3
                  4                                           Prologue
                  5   D         ACF
                  6             BE
                  7
                  8   G
                  9   H         D          ACF                Loop body
                 10   I                    BE
                 11
                 12             G
                 13             H          D         ACF
                 14             I                    BE
                 15                                           Epilogue
                 16                        G
                 17                        H         D
                 18                        I
                 19
                 20                                  G
                 21                                  H
                 22                                  I

 FIG. 17.25 A possible unconstrained schedule of the iterations of the loop in Figure 17.23. The
            boxed parts represent the prologue, body, and epilogue of the software-pipelined loop.



              shown for each time step can be executed in parallel. The boxed parts of the figure
              show the prologue, body, and epilogue of the software pipelined loop. We call the
              resulting schedule “ unconstrained” because it does not take into account limitations
              imposed by the number of available registers or the instruction-level parallelism of
              the processor.
                  Turning the resulting code into the correct prologue, loop body, and epilogue
              requires dealing with resource constraints and adjusting some instructions to be­
              ing executed in the new sequence. Figure 17.26(a) shows the instruction sequence
              that results from simply enumerating the unrolled instructions in order, while Fig­
              ure 17.26(b) shows the result of fixing up the instructions to take into account the
              order in which they are executed and their need for an additional register. Note that,
             Section 17.4     Software Pipelining                                                         557

                   Id      [13],f0                   Id         [13],f0
                   Id      [iO],f2                   Id         [10],f2
                   deccc   il                        deccc      il
                   fmuls   f31,fO,f1                 fmuls      f31,f0,f1
                   add     i3,i5,i3                  add        i3,i5,i3
                   fadds   f2,f1,f2                  fadds      f2,f1,f2
                   Id      [13],f0                   Id         [13],f0
                   Id      [10],f2                   Id         [10+15],f3
                   deccc   11                        deccc      il
                   fmuls   f31,f0,f1                 fmuls      f31,f0,f1
                   add     i3,i5,i3                  add        i3,i5,i3
                   St      f2, [iO]               L: st         f2,[10]
                   add     i0,i5,i0                  add        iO,i5,iO
                   fadds   f2,f1,f2                  fadds      f3,f1,f2
                   Id      [13],f0                   Id         [13],f0
                   Id      [10], f2                  Id         [10+15],f3
                   deccc   il                        deccc      il
                   fmuls   f31,f0,f1                 fmuls      f31,f0,f1
                   add     i3,i5,i3
                   bpos    L                            bpos    L
                   nop                                  add     i3,i5,i3
                   St      f2, [10]                     st      f2,[10]
                   add     iO,i5,iO                     add     i0,i5,i0
                   fadds   f2,f1,f2                     fadds   f3,f1,f2
                   bpos    L
                   St      f2,[10]                      st      f2,[10]
                   add     iO,i5,iO                     add     i0,i5,i0
                   bpos    L
             (a)                                  (b)
FIG. 17.26 (a) Resulting instruction sequence for the pipelined loop, and (b) the result of doing
           register renaming (Section 17.4.5) and fixing the addresses in load instructions so that
           they will execute correctly.



             in addition to deleting the two branches from the epilogue, we have modified all
             but the first occurrences of Id [iO] , f 2 and fa d d s f 2 , f 1 , f 2 to Id [i0 + i5 ] , f 3 and
             fa d d s f 3 , f l , f 2 , respectively, so as to use the correct address and to avoid reusing
             register f 2 before its value is stored. The former modification is necessary because
             the second Id has been moved above the add that increments register iO. Dealing
             with parallelism constraints may motivate rearranging the instructions to take bet­
             ter advantage of the available execution units. For example, if the processor allowed
             one memory or integer operation, one floating-point addition and one multiplica­
             tion, and one branch to be in process at once, then a valid alternate schedule would
             put the second Id in the loop below the f muls, but this would require ten cycles per
             iteration rather than the nine that the current arrangement uses.
                  Producing such pipelinings is conceptually simple. The ican algorithm to find a
             repeating pattern in the unrolled body (which becomes the body of the pipelined
558           C od e Sch ed u lin g


              Sched: sequence of Node

              procedure Pipeline_Schedule(i,nblocks,ninsts,LBlock,SizeLimit,
                  ExecTime) returns integer x integer
                  i, nblocks, SizeLimit: in integer
                 ninsts: in array [1**nblocks] of integer
                  LBlock: in array [l**nblocks] of array [••] LIRInst
                  ExecTime: in integer — > integer
              begin
                  j, k: integer
                  Insts: (sequence of integer) x integer — > sequence
                     of Instruction
                  Dag: DAG
                  ii: integer x array [••] of LIRInst
                  for j := 2 to SizeLimit do
                     ii := Unroll(nblocks,i,ninsts,LBlock,j,nil)
                     Dag:= Build_DAG(iill,ii!2)
                     Schedule(IDag.Nodes I,Dag,Dag.Roots,DagSucc,DagPred,ExecTime)
                     for k := j - 1 by -1 to 1 do
                         if Insts(Sched,k) = Insts(Sched,j)
                            & State(Sched,k) = State(Sched,j) then
                            return <k,j>
                         fi
                     od
                  od
                  return <i,j>
              end     II Pipeline_Schedule

 FIG. 17.27   Algorithm to find a repeating unit from which to construct a software pipelining.



              loop) is show n in Figure 17.2 7 . We assum e again that the loop body is a single
              basic block LBlock [i] [1 ••ninsts [i]]. Unroll (nblocks,/, ninsts, LBlock,/, &)
              produces / copies o f the loop body LBlock [i] [1 • • ninsts [/] ] (see Figure 17.30 for
              the algorithm Unroll( )). Schedule ( / , D , R , D S , D P , E X ) is the basic-block sched­
              uler given in Figure 17.6. Insts ( S , / ) denotes the sequence o f instructions executed
              during time step i in the schedule S, and State ( S , i) denotes the resource state corre­
              spon ding to time step i in schedule S after perform ing iterations 1 through i — 1. The
              resource state can be m odeled by resource vectors, as described in Section 9.2. The
              algorithm incorporates a stoppin g condition (SizeLimit), based on the unrolled size
              o f the loop , to bound the search space.
                    A fter executing the algorithm successfully, the instructions in time steps k
              through / — 1 are the basis for constructing the pipelined loop body, those in steps 1
              through k — 1 are for the p rologue, and those in steps /, . . . are for the epilogue.
              O f course, constructing the final prologue, body, and epilogue requires adjusting
              the code to deal with resource constraints, as in our exam ple above. The scheduling
              algorithm returns a pair o f integers </,/’>, where i is the num ber o f instructions in the
              original loop body and / is the factor by which it has been unrolled.
              Section 17.4     Software Pipelining                                                  559

              for i := 1 to 100 do                   for i := 1 by 2 to 99 do begin
                  s := s + a[i]                          s := s + a[i]
                                                         s := s + a[i+l]
                                                     end
               (a)                                   (b)
 FIG. 17.28 (a) A Pascal loop, and (b) the result of unrolling it by a factor of two.



17.4.3        Loop Unrolling
              Loop unrolling replaces the body of a loop by several copies of the body and adjusts
              the loop-control code accordingly. The number of copies is called the unrolling
              factor and the original loop is called the rolled loop. In another subsection below,
              we discuss variable expansion, which is a transformation that can improve the
              effectiveness of loop unrolling and software pipelining.
                   Unrolling reduces the overhead of executing an indexed loop and may improve
              the effectiveness of other optimizations, such as common-subexpression elimination,
              induction-variable optimizations, instruction scheduling, and software pipelining.
                   For example, the code in Figure 17.28(b) is a version of the loop in Fig­
              ure 17.28(a) that has been unrolled by a factor of two. The unrolled loop executes
              the loop-closing test and branch half as many times as the original loop and may in­
              crease the effectiveness of instruction scheduling by, e.g., making two loads of a [ i ]
              values available to be scheduled in each iteration. On the other hand, the unrolled
              version is larger than the rolled version, so it may impact the effectiveness of the
              instruction cache, possibly negating the improvement gained from unrolling. Such
              concerns dictate that we exercise caution in deciding which loops to unroll and by
              what unrolling factors.
                   Also, notice that we have oversimplified the unrolling transformation in the ex­
              ample: we have assumed that the loop bounds are known constants and that the
              unrolling factor divides the number of iterations evenly. In general, these conditions
              are, of course, not satisfied. However, loops with general bounds can still be un­
              rolled. What we need to do is to keep a rolled copy of the loop, exit the unrolled
              copy when the number of iterations remaining is less than the unrolling factor, and
              then use the rolled copy to execute the remaining iterations. We take this approach
              rather than testing in each unrolled copy of the loop body for early termination be­
              cause one reason for unrolling loops is to allow instruction scheduling more latitude,
              in particular to allow it to interleave instructions from the copies of the body, which
              it cannot do as effectively if there is conditional control flow between the copies.
                   Figure 17.29(a) gives an example of a Fortran 77 loop and Figure 17.29(b)
              shows the result of unrolling it by a factor of u with a rolled copy. Of course, the
              unrolling transformation can be further generalized to loops that increment the loop
              counter by values other than 1.
                   ican code to implement this approach is shown in Figure 17.30. The
              call U n r o ll(n b lo c k s ,ra ,n in sts,B lo c k ,factor ,init) unrolls factor copies of
              Block[m] [1 • *n in sts[m ]] and makes a rolled copy also if it cannot determine that
560           Code Scheduling


                                           do i = lo,hi-u+l,u
                                               body
                                               body/i+l/i
              do i = lo,hi
                 body                          b o d y /± + \i-l/i
              enddo                        enddo
                                           do i = i,hi
                                               body
                                           enddo
              (a)                          (b)
 FIG. 17.29   (a) A more general Fortran 77 loop, and (b) the result of unrolling it by a factor of w.
              The notation body/i/j means body with i substituted for /.

              the number of iterations is a multiple of the unrolling factor. The instructions it is de­
              signed to operate on are MIRInsts and L IR In sts, and I n s t r u c t io n is meant here to
              encompass only those two of our three varieties of intermediate code. Note that the al­
              gorithm deals with a loop that contains only a single basic block and loop control of
              a particular type: it assumes that v a r l is modified only by B lock [m] [n in s t s [m] -2]
              and that

                    Block[m][1] = <kind:label, lbl:,,Ll">
                    Block[m][ninsts[m]-2] = <kind:binasgn,left:varl,opr:add,
                                              opdl:<kind:var,val:var1>,opd2:incr>
                    Block[m][ninsts [m]-1] = <kind:binasgn,left:var3,opr:less,
                                              opdl:<kind:var,val:varl),opd2:final)
                    Block[m][ninsts [m]] = <kind:valif,opd:<kind:var,val:var3>,
                                            lbl:"Ll">

              but it can easily be generalized. It uses several functions, as follows:

         1.   C onstan t (opd) returns tr u e if operand opd is a constant, and f a l s e otherwise.
        2.    new_tmp( ) returns a new temporary name.
         3.   n ew _lab el( ) returns a new label.

              One aspect of the unrolling process for loops that contain more than one basic block
              is not covered by the code in Figure 17.30— labels that occur in the body of the loop
              need to be renamed in each copy to make them distinct.
                   As noted above, the most important issues in loop unrolling are deciding which
              loops to unroll and by what factor. This has two aspects: one involves architec­
              tural characteristics, such as the number of registers available, the available overlap
              among, for example, floating-point operations and memory references, and the size
              and organization o f the instruction cache; and the other is the selection of particular
              loops in a program to unroll and the unrolling factors to use for them. The impact
              of some of the architectural characteristics is often best determined by experimenta­
              tion. The result is usually a heuristic, but unrolling decisions for individual loops can
             Section 17.4     Software Pipelining                                                  561


             procedure Unroll(nblocks,m,ninsts,Block,factor,init)
                 returns integer x array [••] of Instruction
                 m, nblocks, factor, init: in integer
                 ninsts: in array [1**nblocks] of integer
                 Block: in array [1•-nblocks] of array [••] of Instruction
             begin
                 Ulnst: array [••] of Instruction
                 tj: Var
                 lj: Label
                 i, j, div: integer
                 Ulnst[1] := Block [m][1]
                 for i     2 to ninsts[m]-2 do
                    for j := 1 to factor do
                        Ulnst[(j—1)*(ninsts[m]-3)+i] :® Block[m][i]
                    od
                 od
                 tj := new_tmp( )
                 Ulnst[factor*(ninsts[m]-3)+2] := Block[m][ninsts[m]-1]
                 Ulnst[factor*(ninsts[m]-3)+3] := Block[m][ninsts[m]]
                 div := factor*Block[m][ninsts[m]-2].opd2.val
                 if Constant(init) & Constant(Block[m][ninsts[m]-2].opd2)
                    & Constant(Block[m][ninsts[m]-1].opd2)
                    & (Block[m] [ n in s t s [m]-l] .opd2. val-init+l)#
                                                                      /,div = 0 then
                    return <factor*(ninsts[m]-3)+3,Ulnst)
                 else
                    lj := new_label( )
                    Ulnst [factor*(ninsts[m]-3)+4] := <kind:label,lbl:lj>
                    for i := 2 to ninsts[m]-l do
                        Ulnst[factor*(ninsts[m]-3)+i+3] := Block[m] [i]
                    od
                    Ulnst[factor*(ninsts[m]-3)+i+3] :=
                        <kind:valif,opd:Block[m][ninsts[m]].opd,lbl:1j >
                    return <(factor+1)*(ninsts[m]-3)+6,Ulnst)
                 fi
             end      || Unroll

FIG. 17.30   ican code to implement loop unrolling for a specific pattern of loop control.


             benefit significantly from feedback from profiled runs o f the p rogram that contains
             the loops.
                  The result o f a set o f such experim ents w ould be rules that can be used to decide
             w hat loops to unroll, which might depend, for exam ple, on the follow ing types o f
             characteristics o f loops:

        1.   those that contain only a single basic block (i.e., straight-line code),

        2.   those that contain a certain balance o f floating-point and m em ory op eration s or a
             certain balance o f integer m em ory operation s,

        3.   those that generate a sm all num ber o f interm ediate-code instructions, and

        4.   those that have sim ple loop control.
562      Code Scheduling


              The first and second criteria restrict unrolling to loops that are most likely to
         benefit from instruction scheduling. The third keeps the unrolled blocks of code
         short, so as not to adversely impact cache performance. The last criterion keeps the
         compiler from unrolling loops for which it is difficult to determine when to take
         the early exit to the rolled copy for the final iterations, such as when traversing
         a linked list. The unrolling factor may be anywhere from two up, depending on
         the specific contents of the loop body, but will usually not be more than four and
         almost never more than eight, although further development of VLIW machines may
         provide good use for larger unrolling factors.
              It may be desirable to provide the programmer with a compiler option or a
         pragma to specify which loops to unroll and what factors to unroll them by.
              Loop unrolling generally increases the available instruction-level parallelism, es­
         pecially if several other transformations are performed on the copies of the loop
         body to remove unnecessary dependences. Such transformations include software
         register renaming (see Section 17.4.5), variable expansion (see next subsection), and
         instruction combining (see Section 18.12). Using dependence testing to disambiguate
         potential aliases between memory addresses can also remove dependences. Thus,
         unrolling has the potential of significant benefit for most implementations and par­
         ticularly for superscalar and VLIW ones.
              Instruction combining can make more registers available for renaming. As an
         example of this, consider the code sequence

             r2 <r- r l + 1
             r3 <- r2 * 2

         Assuming that we are generating code for a machine that has shift and add instruc­
         tions, such as pa-r isc , and that r2 is dead after this sequence, it can be transformed
         into

             r3 <- 2 * iT + 2

         thus making r2 available.

17.4.4   Variable Expansion
         Variable expansion in the body of an unrolled loop that has an unrolling factor of n
         selects variables that can be expanded into n separate copies, one for each copy of
         the loop body, and that can be combined at the loop’s exits to produce the values
         that the original variables would have had. The expansion has the desirable prop­
         erty of decreasing the number of dependences in the loop, thus making instruction
         scheduling likely to be more effective when applied to it.
              The easily detected opportunities for variable expansion include accumulator,
         induction, and search variables. Figure 17.31(a) gives examples of all three types,
         and Figure 17.31(b) shows the result of unrolling the loop by a factor of two and ex­
         panding the accumulator, induction, and search variables. Note that some of the in­
         duction variables (the addresses of the array elements) have not been expanded, since
         the example is hir code; however, they are also amenable to variable expansion.
             Section 17.4    Software Pipelining                                               563

             acc <- 10                                     acc <- 10
                                                           accl <- 0
             max <- 0                                      max    0
                                                           maxi <- 0
             imax <- 0                                     imax <- 0
                                                           imaxl     0
                                                           il    2
             for i <- 1 to 100 do                          for i <- 1 by 2 to 99 do
                 acc <- acc + a[i]*b[i]                        acc <- acc + a[i]*b[i]
                 if a[i] > max then                            if a[i] > max then
                     max <- a[i]                                   max <- a[i]
                     imax <- i                                     imax <- i
                 endif                                         endif
                                                               accl <- accl + a[il]*b[il]
                                                               if a[il] > maxi then
                                                                   maxi <- a[il]
                                                                   imaxl <- il
                                                               endif
                                                               il <- il + 2
             endfor                                        endfor
                                                           acc <- acc + accl
                                                           if maxi > max then
                                                               max <- maxi
                                                               imax <- imaxl
                                                           endif
             (a)                                           (b)
FIG. 17.31   (a) A hir loop with examples of accumulator (acc), induction (i), and search (max and
             imax) variables; and (b) the loop after unrolling by a factor of two and expanding the
             accumulator, induction, and search variables.




                  The algorithms for the three kinds of variable expansion are broadly similar. We
             discuss only accumulator-variable expansion and leave it to the reader to adapt the
             approach to the other two types of variables.
                  To determine whether a variable serves as an additive accumulator (multipli­
             cative ones are also possible but are less frequent), we require that it be used and
             defined in the loop only by add and/or subtract instructions and that the unrolled
             loop body contain n copies of such instructions, one per copy of the loop body,
             where n is the unrolling factor. Having determined that a variable is an additive ac­
             cumulator, we replace the second through « th copies by new temporary variables,
             initialize them all to zero at the loop entrance, and at each of the loop’s exits, add
             them to the original variable.
                  In the example in Figure 17.31, acc is an additive accumulator. In the unrolled
             version, it has been replaced with a c c l in the second copy of the body; a c c l has
             been initialized to zero before entering the loop; and an instruction to add it to acc
             has been included at the loop exit.
564            Code Scheduling


               1     fl <- f2 + 1.0           f27 <- f2 + 1.0           fl +- f3 * 2.0
               2     [fp+52]   <- fl          [fp+52]   <- f27          f27 <- f2 + 1.0
               3     fl <- f3 * 2.0           fl -e- f3 * 2.0            [fp+40]   *- fl
               4     [fp+40]      fl          [fp+40]   +- fl            [fp+52]   *- f27

                    (a)                       (b)                       (c)

 FIG. 17.32 (a) An example of lir code to which register renaming may be applied, (b) the result
            of performing it, and (c) an alternate schedule of the instructions made possible by the
            renaming.


17.4.5         Register Renaming
               Register renaming is a transformation that may increase the flexibility available
               to code scheduling. It can be applied to low-level code (in our case, lir code) to
               remove unnecessary dependences between instructions that use the same register
               by replacing some of the uses by other registers. For example, in the basic block
               shown in Figure 17.32(a), the use of f l in all four instructions, combined with
               the information that f 1 is live at the exit from the block, makes it impossible to
               reorder the instructions at all. The substitution of f 27 for f 1 in the first and second
               instructions (assuming that f27 is not live at that point) shown in Figure 17.32(b)
               allows the instructions to be scheduled in any order that preserves the occurrence
               of the definitions of f27 and f 1 before their respective uses, such as the order in
               Figure 17.32(c).
                    We simplify our discussion of renaming somewhat by assuming that all registers
               are of the same type. For the more realistic case of separate integer and floating-point
               register sets, we apply the algorithm twice, once for each register set.
                    Given basic block i consisting of instructions LBlock [z] [1 • • n \, we first need to
               determine several sets of registers, as follows:

          1.   Regs is the set of all general-purpose registers provided by the architecture.
          2.   RegsUsed(z) is the set of registers used and/or defined in block z.
          3.   RegsLiveEntry(z) is the set of registers that are live on entry to block z.
          4.   R egsL iveE xit (z) is the set of registers that are live on exit from block z.
          5.   Def sL iv e E x it (z) is the set of indexes of instructions that define registers that are
               live on exit from block z.

               A combination of inspection and data-flow analysis can be used to determine these
               sets. A vailR egs, the set of registers available for renaming in block z, is then

                   AvailRegs = Regs - (RegsUsed(z) u RegsLiveEntry(z)
                                u RegsLiveExit (z))

               Next, for each register r in RegsUsed(z), we compute D efU ses(r), the maximal
               sequence of pairs </,s> such that / is the index of an instruction in block z that
               defines r, and s is the set of indexes of instructions in block z that use the value
               of r as computed by instruction /; the elements of the sequence are ordered by the
              Section 17.4    Software Pipelining                                                565

              definitions in the pairs. Then, as long as there are registers in AvailRegs and pairs
              in DefUses (r) such that the definition is dead on exit from the block, we replace
              register r in its definitions and uses by a register selected from AvailRegs.
                   For our example block (call it A) in Figure 17.32(a), the sets are as follows:
                  Regs                  = {f0,f1,...,f31}
                  RegsUsed(A)           = {fl,f2,f3>
                  RegsLiveEntry(A) = {f2,f3}
                  RegsLiveExit(A)       = {fl}
                  DefsLiveExit(A)       = {3}
                  AvailRegs             = {f0,f4,...,f31>
                  DefUses(fl)           = [<1,{2»,<3,{4»]
              so the definition of fl in line 1 and its use in line 2 of column (a) are replaced
              by a register chosen randomly from AvailRegs, namely, f27, as shown in col­
              umn (b).
                  i c a n code to rename registers in a basic block is given in Figure 17.33. W e

              assume that Regs, RegsUsed( ), RegsLiveEntry ( ), RegsLiveExit ( ), and
              Def sLiveExit ( ) have been precomputed. The procedures used in the code are as
              follows:

         1.   Defin es (inst ,r) returns true if instruction inst defines register r, and false other­
              wise.
         2.   Uses (inst, r) returns true if instruction inst uses register r as an operand, and false
              otherwise.
         3. replace.result(z, LBlock, ra,<zr) replaces the result register in instruction
            LBlock[ra] [z] by ar.
         4. replace.operands(z,LBlock,m ,r ,a r ) replaces occurrences of r as an operand reg­
            ister in instruction LBlock [ra] [z] by ar.

                    Note that if register r is in RegsLiveEntry(ra) but not in RegsLiveExit (ra),
              then r becomes available as a renaming register after its last use in the block; we
              have not accounted for this in the code.
                    Register renaming can be adapted to work on extended basic blocks as long as
              we are careful to maintain unchanged the last definition of each register that is live
              on exit from each exit block. For example, in the code in Figure 17.34, given that f 1
              is live on exit from B3 but not from B2, we must preserve the last definition of f 1 in
              block Bl, but we can rename f 1 in B2.

17.4.6        Other Approaches to Software Pipelining
              It is indicative of the state of the art in software pipelining that there have been
              numerous other approaches proposed in recent years. These include circular sched­
              uling, which resembles our window-scheduling approach, and a variety of methods
              that resemble our unroll-and-compact approach, including the following:
566                  C ode Scheduling


                     Regs: set of Register
                     RegsUsed, RegsLiveEntry, RegsLiveExit: integer — > set of Register
                     DefsLiveExit: integer —> set of integer

                     procedure Register.Rename(m,ninsts,LBlock)
                        m : in integer
                        ninsts: in array [l**m] of integer
                        LBlock: inout array [••] of array [••] of LIRInst
                     begin
                        AvailRegs: set of Register
                        r, ar: Register
                        def, i, j : integer
                        uses: set of integer
                        DefUses: Register — > sequence of (integer x set of integer)
                        AvailRegs := Regs - (RegsUsed(m) u RegsLiveEntry(m) u RegsLiveExit(m))
                        if AvailRegs = 0 then
                            return
                        fi
                        for each r e RegsUsed(m) do
                            DefUses (r) := []
                            i := 1
                            while i ^ ninsts[m] do
                               if Defines(LBlock[m][i],r) then
                                  def := i; uses := 0
                                   for j    i+1 to ninsts[m] do
                                      if Uses(LBlock[m][j],r) then
                                         uses u= {j}
                                      fi
                                      if Defines(LBlock[m][j],r) then
                                                       i       j
                                                       goto LI
                                                 fi
                     LI:                    od
                                      fi
                                      DefUses(r)                [<def,uses>]
                                      i += 1
                                od
                           od

 F IG .   1 7 .3 3   ic a n   c o d e t o r e n a m e r e g i s t e r s in a b a s i c b l o c k .




               1.    L am ’s approach for VLIW systems,
               2.    optim al loop parallelization,
               3.    perfect pipelining,
               4.    Bodin and C harot’s approach,
               5.    approaches to softw are pipelining with resource constraints, and
               6.    decom posed softw are pipelining.
                  Section 17.4        Software Pipelining                                            567

                     for each r e RegsUsed(m) do
                        while IDefUses(r)I > 0 do
                           def := (DefUses(r)ll)@l
                           uses := (DefUses(r)11)@2
                           DefUses(r) ©= 1
                           if def £ DefsLiveExit(m) then
                              ar := ♦AvailRegs
                              AvailRegs -= {ar}
                              replace_result(def,LBlock,m,ar)
                              for each i e uses do
                                 replace_operands(i,LBlock,m,r,ar)
                              od
                           fi
                        od
                     od
                  end    II Register.Rename
F IG . 1 7 .3 3   (continued)




F IG . 1 7 .3 4   An e x am p le o f an ex ten d ed b asic b lo ck fo r register ren am in g.


                  Thus it is still an active area of research to determine what the best approach is, both
                  in terms of resulting loop performance and efficiency of the pipelining algorithm.
                  (See Section 17.8 for detailed references.)
                       An interesting experiment was reported by Ruttenberg et al. An optimal soft­
                  ware pipelining algorithm called m o s t , developed at McGill University, was adapted
                  to serve in place of the pipeliner in the m i p s compilers and a series of experiments
                  were performed to compare the heuristic algorithm in the m i p s compilers with the
                  optimal one. In compiling all the SPEC92 benchmarks, a better schedule was found
                  for only one loop by the optimal algorithm than the heuristic one, yet the opti­
                  mal algorithm required about 3,000 times the amount of time used by the heuristic
                  algorithm. Thus, software pipelining is definitely worth including in an aggressive
                  optimizing compiler, and heuristic approaches may perform very well for most pro­
                  grams.
568           Code Scheduling


              LI: Id    [r2],r3                           *               LI:  Id    [r2],r3
                  Id    [rl] ,f0                          *                    Id    [rl] ,f0
                  cmp   r3,0                                              LIa: cmp r3,0
                  ble   L2                                                     ble   L2
                  nop                                                          nop
                  add   r4,1,r4                                                add r4,1,r4
                  fadds f2,f0,f3                                               fadds f2,f0,f3
                                                          *                    Id    [r2],r3
                                                          *                    Id    [rl] ,f0
                  b     L3                                                     b     L3
                  nop                                                          nop
              L2: fsubs f3,f0,f3                                          L2: fsubs f3,f0,f3
                  stf   f3, [rl]                                               stf   f3,[rl]
                  bg    LI                                                     bg    Lla
                  nop                                                          nop
                                                          *                    Id    [r2],r3
                                                          *                    Id    [rl],f0
              L3: sub          r2,4,r2                                    L3: sub r2,4,r2
                  sub          rl,4,rl                                         sub rl,4,rl
                  cmp          rl ,0                                           cmp rl ,4
                                                                               Id    [r2],r3
                                                                               Id    [rl],f0
                     bg        LI                                              bg    Lla
                     nop                                                       nop
                                                                               cmp r3,0
                                                                               ble   L2a
                                                                               nop
                                                                               add r4,1,r4
                                                                               b     L3a
                                                                               fadds f2,f0,f3
                                                                          L2a: fsubs f3,f0,f3
                                                                               stf   f3, [rl]
                                                                          L3a: sub r2,4,r2
                                                                               sub rl,4,rl
              (a)                                                         (b)
 FIG. 17.35   (a ) A s p a r c l o o p c o n t a in in g a c o n d it io n a l, a n d (b ) th e r e s u lt o f w in d o w s c h e d u lin g it a n d
              m o v in g th e t w o I d in s t r u c t io n s m a r k e d w ith a s t e r is k s in to b o t h a r m s o f th e c o n d it io n a l.


17.4.7        Hierarchical Reduction

              Hierarchical reduction is a technique that was developed by Lam ([Lam88] and
              [Lam90]) to handle pipelining of loops that contain control-flow constructs. The
              method consists of two parts, one to handle conditionals and the other to handle
              nested loops. To handle nested loops, one pipelines from the innermost loop out­
              ward, reducing each loop as it is scheduled to a single node, with the scheduling and
              resource constraints of the loop attached to the node that represents it.
                    To handle conditionals, one first does basic-block scheduling on the then and
              e ls e branches independently and then reduces the conditional to a single node,
       Section 17.5    Trace Scheduling                                                   569

       again with the scheduling and resource constraints of the entire if- t h e n - e ls e
       attached to it. This, in effect, pads the shorter of the two branches to have the
       same latency as the longer ones. On the other hand, one need not produce code
       that satisfies this constraint—inserting unnecessary nops would merely waste space,
       not improve the schedule.
            As an example of software pipelining applied to a loop containing a conditional,
       consider the code in Figure 17.35(a), assuming we are compiling for the same
       processor structure as assumed for the code in Figure 17.15. If we window schedule
       the first two instructions in the loop (the two Ids marked with asterisks) to become
       the end of the loop body and we move the two loads into both branches of the
       conditional, we obtain the code in Figure 17.35(b). We can then reschedule the then
       and e ls e branches and do further pipelining, if desirable.




17.5   Trace Scheduling
       Trace scheduling is an instruction scheduling method developed by Fisher [Fish81]
       that is much more ambitious than the ones we have discussed so far. It is most useful
       for VLIW machines and superscalar implementations of degree greater than about
       eight.
            A trace is a sequence of instructions, including branches but not including loops,
       that is executed for some input data. Trace scheduling uses a basic-block scheduling
       method (such as the one described in Section 17.1.2) to schedule the instructions
       in each entire trace, beginning with the trace with the highest execution frequency.
       It then adds compensation code, as needed, at each entry to and exit from a trace
       to compensate for any effects that out-of-order execution may have had that are
       inconsistent with that entry or exit. Loop bodies are generally unrolled several times
       before being scheduled. The scheduling and compensation process is repeated until
       either all traces have been scheduled or a chosen threshold of execution frequency
       has been reached. Any remaining traces are scheduled by standard methods, such as
       the basic-block and software-pipelining approaches. While trace scheduling can be
       quite effective with estimated execution profiles, like most scheduling methods it is
       more effective when provided with profiling feedback.
            As a simple example of trace scheduling, consider the flowgraph fragment in
       Figure 17.36. Suppose we determine that the most frequently executed path through
       the flowgraph consists of blocks Bl, B3, B4, B5, and B7. Since B4 is the body of a loop,
       this path is divided into three traces, one consisting of Bl and B3, the second consist­
       ing of the loop body B4, and the third containing B5 and B7. Each of the three traces
       would be scheduled independently, with, for example, compensation code added at
       the exit from the trace for Bl and B3 corresponding to taking the N exit from block
       Bl. Suppose the code for blocks Bl, B2, and B3 is as shown in Figure 17.37(a). In
       Figure 17.37(b), the trace scheduler has decided to move the assignment y           x-y
       across the branch into block B3; a copy of this instruction must then be placed at
       the beginning of B2 as compensation code. After the three selected traces have been
       scheduled, each of B2 and B6 would be scheduled as a separate trace.
570                 Code Scheduling




 F I G . 1 7 .3 6   An e x a m p le fo r trace sch ed u lin g.




                    B l:   x <- x + 1
                           y     x - y
                           i f x < 5 g o to B3                        i f x < 5 g o to B3
                                                               B2:       y <- x - y
                    B 2 : z <- x * z                                  Z     <r-X *Z
                          x <- x + 1                                  X     < -X + 1
                          g o to B5                                   g o to B5
                                                               B3:       y <- x - y
                    B3: y    2 * y                                    y     <- 2 * y
                        x <- x - 2                                    x     <- x - 2



                    (a)                                        (b)

 F IG . 1 7 .3 7    (a) E x a m p le mir co d e fo r the trace in F igu re 1 7 .3 6 m ad e u p o f B l an d B3 (alo n g w ith
                    co d e fo r B2), a n d (b) the resu lt o f a sch ed u lin g o p e ra tio n an d co m p e n satio n code.




                           T r a c e s c h e d u lin g c a n fre q u e n tly a c h ie v e la r g e p e r fo r m a n c e im p r o v e m e n ts fo r
                    V L IW o r h ig h -d e g re e s u p e r s c a la r m a c h in e s, b u t it c a n a ls o r e su lt in la r g e in c re a se s
                    in c o d e siz e a n d in p o o r o r e r ra tic p e r fo r m a n c e if a p r o g r a m ’s b e h a v io r v a rie s
                    sig n ific a n tly w ith its in p u t.
                  Section 17.6        Percolation Scheduling                                                          571


17.6              Percolation Scheduling
                  Percolation scheduling is another aggressive cross-block scheduling method that was
                  developed by Nicolau [Nico86]. It is designed to work on parallel computation
                  graphs (PCGs) consisting of computation nodes, each of which includes a set of
                  operations that are performed in parallel, a tree of control-flow operations that may
                  determine a set of successor nodes, and a default successor that is used if the tree
                  is empty. Of course, this represents a departure from our intermediate-code forms
                  in that each of them enforces sequential semantics on the contents of a basic block.
                  A computation node is either one of two special nodes called en ter and e x it ; or
                  a node that consists of a set of operations O that are executed in parallel (with all
                  loads performed before all stores), a continuation tree T that conditionally selects a
                  set of successor computation nodes, and a continuation C that is used if T is empty.
                  (In Figure 17.39, the type PCGnode is used to represent computation nodes.)
                       Percolation scheduling uses an additional type of dependence relation called
                  write-live dependence, written <$wl, that is defined as follows. Let v be a computation
                  node and u be one of its successors. Then, v <$wl u if there exists a successor w of
                  v such that some variable live on the edge v^>w is written to in node m, where a
                  variable is live on an edge if there is a path beginning with the edge and extending
                  to the parallel computation graph’s exit on which the variable is read before it is
                  written. In Figure 17.38, the variable n produces a write-live dependence v <$wI u.
                       Percolation scheduling consists of four basic transformations that can be applied
                  to PCGs, called delete node, move operation, move conditional, and unify. The first




                                         (m       n)




                                              i
                                         [ exit I

F IG . 1 7 .3 8   An e x am p le o f w rite-live d ep en d en ce, nam ely, v   8wl u, b e cau se o f v aria b le n.
572           Code Scheduling


              procedure Perc_Schedule_l(r)
                 r: in PCGnode
              begin
                 Cand: set of PCGnode
                 n : PCGnode
                 again: boolean
                 repeat
                     again    false
                     Cand := {r}
                     for each n e Cand do
                        if Delete_Node_Applic(n) then
                           Delete_Node(n)
                           Cand u= Succ(n)
                           again := true
                        elif Move_Oper_Applic(n) then
                           Move_0per(n)
                           Cand u= Succ(n)
                           again := true
                        elif Move_Cond_Applic(n) then
                           Move_Cond(n)
                           Cand u= Succ(n)
                           again := true
                        elif Unify_Applic(n) then
                           Unify(n)
                           Cand u= Succ(n)
                           again := true
                        fi
                        Cand -= {n}
                     od
                 until !again
              end    |I Perc_Schedule_l
 FIG. 17.39 A simple algorithm for percolation scheduling.


              deletes nodes that have become empty; the second and third move operations and
              conditionals, respectively, to predecessor nodes; and the last moves a set of identical
              operations from all the successors of a node to that node.
                   The algorithm to apply these transformations to a PCG may be anywhere
              from trivially simple to quite complicated. For example, we can construct four
              predicates that test applicability of the transformations (Delete_Node_Applic( ),
              Move_Oper_Applic( ), Move_Cond_Applic( ), and Unify_Applic( )) to a sub­
              graph that is rooted at a particular PCG node and four procedures (Delete_Node( ),
              Move_0per( ), Move_Cond( ), and Unify( ), respectively) to apply them. Given
              those predicates and procedures, the code in Figure 17.39 is a simple percolation
              scheduler. It tries, for each node, to apply each of the four transformations and re­
              peats the transformations until no more apply. However, this won’t quite do: there is
              no guarantee that the algorithm will terminate on an arbitrary PCG. What is needed
              is to break the PCG into components that are DAGs and then to apply the algorithm
              to them. Then termination can be guaranteed.
       Section 17.7    Wrap-Up                                                          573

            Clearly other regimes for applying the transformations are possible and other
       types of optimizations can profitably be mixed in with percolation scheduling. For
       example, moving an operation into a node may create an opportunity for common-
       subexpression elimination.
            Nicolau defines a series of meta-transformations that are built from the basic
       four. These include: (1) a transformation called m igrate ( ) that moves an operation
       as far upward in a PCG as dependences will allow it to go; (2) an extension of the
       technique to irreducible PCGs, i.e., to those with multiple-entry loops; and (3) a
       transformation called compact_path( ) that generalizes trace scheduling by moving
       operations upward along the path with the highest execution frequency.




17.7   Wrap-Up
       This chapter has focused on methods to schedule instructions to improve perfor­
       mance. These are some of the most important optimizations for most programs
       on most machines, including all Rises and more and more cisc implementations.
       We have covered branch scheduling, basic-block scheduling, cross-block scheduling,
       software pipelining (including loop unrolling, variable expansion, register renaming,
       and hierarchical reduction), boosting, trace scheduling, and percolation scheduling.
            After recognizing that almost all of the scheduling problems are at least NP-
       hard, even in their simplest formulations, we have proceeded to describe heuristic
       solutions that almost always work very well in practice.
            Combining basic-block and branch scheduling is the easiest to implement of
       the approaches discussed; even this approach can produce major improvements in
       execution speed, frequently at least 10%.
            Cross-block and speculative scheduling are harder to implement but improve
       on the basic-block form by moving instructions between blocks. These methods fre­
       quently produce even larger decreases in execution time, particularly if the hardware
       supports speculative loads.
            Software pipelining (with loop unrolling, variable expansion, register renaming,
       and hierarchical reduction) operates on loop bodies and can result in even larger per­
       formance improvements. There are several different kinds of approaches to software
       pipelining, of which we have described two examples, one easier to implement and
       one harder but usually more effective. There is, as yet, no definitive answer on the
       best approach to use, as indicated by the list of methods in Section 17.4.6.
            Loop unrolling is a transformation that replaces a loop body with some number
       of copies of the body and adjusts the loop-control code accordingly. If the compiler
       does not include software pipelining, we recommend doing loop unrolling between
       dead-code elimination and code hoisting in box C4 of the diagram in Figure 17.40.
           Variable expansion is a subsidiary technique that is useful in loop bodies that
       have been unrolled, to decouple operations in each copy that put their results in a
       particular variable. It provides one such variable for each loop body and combines
       their resulting values after the loop. Register renaming is similar to variable expan­
       sion in that it removes unnecessary dependences between instructions that use the
       same registers even though they don’t need to.
574            C od e Sch ed ulin g




 FIG . 17.40   Order of optimizations with scheduling phases in bold type.

                     All the transform ation s discussed above are best perform ed very close to the
               end o f the optim ization (and com pilation) process, since, to be m ore than marginally
               effective, they require either a form o f m achine code or a low-level intermediate code
               that accurately m odels the target m achine.
                     Trace and percolation scheduling are tw o global code-scheduling m ethods that
               can have very large benefits for som e types o f program s, m ostly numeric ones that
               operate on arrays, and for som e architectures, typically high-degree superscalar and
               V LIW m achines. They are best structured as drivers for the optim ization process,
               i.e., we w ould build an optim izer arou nd either type o f global scheduling and invoke
               other optim izations, as app rop riate, from them.
                     Figure 17.4 0 show s a suggested order for optim ization, with scheduling opti­
               m izations in b old type. We do instruction scheduling (branch, basic-block, cross-
            Section 17.8    Further Reading                                                  575




FIG. 17.40 (continued)



            block, and software pipelining and its subsidiaries) immediately before register
            allocation and, if any spill code has been generated, repeat branch and basic-
            block scheduling after register allocation. A compiler that does not include software
            pipelining should place loop unrolling and variable expansion earlier in the com pila­
            tion process, along with other loop optimizations. Trace and percolation scheduling
            are omitted from the diagram since, as described above, they require a complete
            restructuring of the optimization process.




17.8        Further Reading
            Rymarczyk’s guidelines for assembly-language programmers to get the best advan­
            tage from the pipelined processors in IBM System/370 implementations is [Ryma82].
            m ip s -x is described in [Chow86].
                  See [GarJ79] for a proof that basic-block scheduling is an NP-hard problem.
            Basic-block schedulers that use list scheduling include those described in [GibM86]
            and [Warr90]. The proof that list scheduling produces a schedule that is within a
            factor of two of optimal for a machine with one or more identical pipelines is given
            by Lawler et al. [LawL87].
576          Code Scheduling


                  Smotherman et al. [SmoK91] survey the types of DAGs and heuristics used in a
             series of implemented schedulers, including ones developed by Gibbons and Much-
             nick [GibM86], Krishnamurthy [Kris90], Schlansker [Schl91], Shieh and Papachris-
             tou [ShiP89], Tiemann [Tiem89], and Warren [Warr90]. Hennessy and Gross’s
             machine-level DAG is described in [HenG83]. Balanced scheduling is described in
             [KerE93] and [LoEg95]. Golumbic and Rainish’s discussion of transformations that
             help cover the branch delays in power is found in [GolR90].
                  The GNU instruction-scheduler generator is, unfortunately, not very well de­
             scribed. The scheduler that formed the basis for it is described in [Tiem89]. The
             scheduler generator is probably best described by the code that implements it,
             namely, the file g e n a ttrta b . c in the main directory of the GNU C compiler distribu­
             tion (see Section C.3.1) and by examples in the machine-description files machine.md
             found in the conf ig subdirectory.
                  Approaches currently in use for scheduling across basic-block boundaries are
             discussed in [Wall92], [BerC92], and [MahR94]. [EbcG94] discusses the application
             of scheduling techniques developed for VLIW architectures to superscalar Rises.
                  Speculative loads and their use in scheduling are discussed in [RogL92],
             [ColN87], [WeaG94], and [Powe93].
                  [EbcG94] describes both speculative scheduling and unspeculation. [GolR90]
             and [BerR91] describe earlier approaches to speculative scheduling.
                  Circular scheduling is described in [Jain91 ]. Descriptions of pipeline-scheduling
             methods that resemble our unroll-and-compact approach are as follows:

                 Method                                       Reference
                 Lam’s approach for vliw systems              [Lam88]
                 Optimal loop parallelization                 [AikN88a] and [Aike88]
                 Perfect pipelining                           [AikN88b] and [Aike88]
                 Bodin and Charot’s approach                  [BodC90]
                 Approaches with resource constraints          [EisW92] and [AikN91]
                 Decomposed software pipelining               [WanE93]

             The approach to software pipelining used in the m ips compilers, the optimal pipelin­
             ing algorithm m o st developed at McGill University, and a comparison of them are
             described in [RutG96].
                 Variable expansion is described in Mahlke et al. [MahC92].
                 The details of hierarchical reduction can be found in [Lam88] and [Lam90].
             Trace scheduling is described in [Fish81] and [E1H85]. Percolation scheduling is first
             described in [Nico86].



17.9         Exercises
       17.1 For each of the heuristics given in Section 17.1.2, write a sequence of lir instructions
            for which using only that heuristic provides the best schedule and one for which it
            does not.
           Section 17.9      Exercises                                                            577

     17.2 The text in Section 17.4.3 alludes to some modifications that need to be made
          to the code produced by an unroll-and-compact software pipeliner. What are the
          modifications and why are they needed?
     17.3 Give an example of the use of hierarchical reduction to pipeline a loop that contains
          an inner loop and an if- t h e n - e ls e construct.
     17.4 Give an example of a basic block of lir code for which register renaming allows a
          schedule that decreases execution time by at least one-third.
     17.5 Modify the list scheduling algorithm in Figure 17.6 for use in scheduling code for
          a three-scalar implementation in which there are two integer pipelines and one
          floating-point pipeline.
ADV 17.6 Generalize the algorithm from the preceding exercise so that it schedules code for an
         w-scalar processor with « z processors of each of m types PC lassO ) such that
                m
                \ Z n' = n
                i= 1
           and instructions Ji, J 2 , . . . , Ik such that /; can execute on processor / if and only if
           IC la ss Ui) = P C la ss(/). Let have an issue latency of cycles and a result latency
           of r£, independent of any interinstruction conflicts.
     17.7 Give ican code to expand (a) accumulator and (b) search variables in an unrolled
          loop.
                                                                      CHAPTER 18




                  Control-Flow and
            Low-Level Optimizations




     T
              his chapter covers optimizations that apply to the control flow of a proce­
              dure, dead-code elimination, and the remaining global optimizations that
              are best carried out on programs in a low-level intermediate code (such as
              lir ), or on a structured form of assembly language.
          Some of them, such as dead-code elimination, may profitably be applied several
     times during compilation, because several other transformations may create dead
     code and it is desirable to eliminate it promptly to reduce the size of the procedure
     that is being compiled.
          The control-flow transformations that produce longer basic blocks have the
     potential to increase available instruction-level parallelism, which is particularly
     important for superscalar implementations.
          Accurate branch prediction is important because it increases the chance that a
     processor will fetch the correct continuation path from an instruction cache, the
     main memory, or a second-level cache. As cache delays become longer relative to
     cycle time, the importance of branch prediction continues to increase.
          The last few optimizations in this chapter are often known as postpass or
     peephole optimizations. The first term is used because they are generally among the
     last optimizations to be performed and are always done after code generation. The
     other term refers to the fact that many of them can be carried out by moving a small
     window or peephole across the generated code to search for segments of code they
     apply to.
          The transformations discussed below are as follows:1

1.   unreachable-code elimination, which removes blocks that cannot possibly be exe­
     cuted because there are no paths from the entry to the blocks;
2.   straightening, which creates longer basic blocks by replacing some kinds of branches
     by the code they branch to;

                                                                                     579
580          Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


        3.   if simplifications, which eliminate unused arms of ifs and possibly entire if con­
             structs;
        4.   loop simplifications, which replace some empty or very simple loops by straight-line
             code;
        5.   loop inversion, which replaces a test at the beginning of a loop and an unconditional
             closing branch at the end by a test at the end;
        6.   unswitching, which moves loop-invariant conditionals out of loops;
        7.   branch optimizations, which replace various kinds of branches to branches by sim­
             pler code;
        8.   tail merging, or cross jumping, which turns identical tails of basic blocks into one
             such tail and branches from the others to the tail of the remaining one;
        9.   conditional moves, which can replace some simple if constructs by code sequences
             that contain no branches;
       10.   dead-code elimination, which removes instructions that can be determined to have
             no effect on the result of a computation;
       11.   branch prediction, which refers to predicting, either statically or dynamically,
             whether a conditional branch causes a transfer of control or not; and
       12.   machine idioms and instruction combining, which replace single instructions or
             sequences of instructions by single ones that perform the same task faster.


18.1         Unreachable-Code Elimination
             Unreachable code is code that cannot possibly be executed, regardless of the in­
             put data. It may never have been executable for any input data to begin with, or
             it may have achieved that status as a result of other optimizations. Its elimination
             has no direct effect on the execution speed of a program but obviously decreases
             the space the program occupies, and so may have secondary effects on its speed,
             particularly by improving its instruction-cache utilization. Also, elimination of un­
             reachable code may enable other control-flow transformations, such as straightening
             (see Section 18.2), that reduce execution time.
                  Note that elimination of unreachable code is one of two transformations that
             are occasionally confused with each other. The other is dead-code elimination (see
             Section 18.10), which removes code that is executable but that has no effect on the
             result of the computation being performed.
                  To identify and remove unreachable code, we assume that there is a table of basic
             blocks and, for each block, the sets of predecessors and successors. We proceed as
             follows:
        1.   Set again to f a l s e .
        2.   Iterate through the Block [ ] array, looking for blocks such that there is no non­
             empty path from the entry block to those blocks. When such a block is found,
            Section 18.1     Unreachable-Code Elimination                                          581


            procedure Elim_Unreach_Code(en,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Pred,Succ)
                en: in integer
                nblocks: inout integer
                ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
                Block: inout array [1**nblocks] of array [1••nblocks] of Instruction
                Pred, Succ: inout integer — > set of integer
            begin
                again: boolean
                i: integer
                repeat
                   again := false
                   i := ♦Succ(en)
                   while i < nblocks do
                       if No_Path(en,i) then
                          ninsts[i] := 0
                          Block[i] := nil
                          again := true
                          delete_block(i,nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
                       fi
                       i += 1
                   od
               until !again
            end      || Elim_Unreach_Code

FIG. 18.1   Algorithm to eliminate unreachable code.




            delete it and adjust the predecessor and successor functions to reflect its having been
            removed and set again to tru e.
       3.   If again is tru e, go to step 1.
       4.   Adjust the Block and related data structures to compact the blocks at the beginning
            of the Block array.


            Note that the last step above is unnecessary if it is acceptable to simply set
            Block [/] = n i l for an unreachable block /.
                 ican code for the routine Elim_Unreach_Code( ) to implement this is given in
            Figure 18.1. The algorithm uses the function No_Path(/,/), which returns tru e if
            there is no non-empty path from block i to block /, and f a l s e otherwise; and the
            function d elete_block(/‘, n blocks, n in sts,B lo c k ,S u c c ,P re d ), which is defined
            in Figure 4.17.
                 Figure 18.2(a) shows the flowgraph of a m ir procedure that contains unreach­
            able code, namely, blocks B2, B3, and B5. The value of n is 7 and the n in sts, Pred,
            and Succ data structures for this code are given in Table 18.1(a). After unreachable-
            code elimination, the value of nblocks is 4, the data structures’ values are as shown
            in Table 18.1(b), and the resulting flowgraph is as shown in Figure 18.2(b).
582            C o n tro l-F lo w an d L ow -Level O p tim iza tio n s




               (a)                                                       (b)
  FIG . 18.2   Our example (a) before and (b) after unreachable-code elimination.


TA BLE 18.1    The basic-block data structures for the flowgraph in Figure 18.2.

               i                  ninsts [/]              Succ0‘)              PredO)

               entry              0                       {Bl}                 0
               B1                 3                       {B4>                 {entry}
               B2                 3                       {B3}                 {B5}
               B3                 1                       {B5>                 {B2}
               B4                 5                       {exit}               {Bl}
               B5                 1                       {B2,exit}            {B3}
               exit               0                       0                    {B4,B5}

               (a)


               i                   ninsts [/]                 SuccO)           Pred(/)

               entry               0                          {Bl}             0
               B1                  3                          {B4}             {entry}
               B4                  5                          {exit}           {Bl}
               exit                0                          0                {B4}

               (b)
             Section 18.2     Straightening                                                       583

18.2         Straightening
             Straightening is an optimization that applies, in its most basic form, to pairs of basic
             blocks such that the first has no successors other than the second and the second
             has no predecessors other than the first. Since they are both basic blocks, either the
             second one immediately follows the first one or the first of them must end with an
             unconditional branch to the second. In the former case, the transformation does
             nothing and in the latter it replaces the branch with the second block. Figure 18.3
             shows an example. Block B1 has a single successor B2, whose only predecessor is B l.
             The transformation fuses them into the new block Bla.
                  However, the transformation is not quite as simple as the flowgraphs suggest.
             Consider the code in Figure 18.4(a), in which the blocks beginning with L I and L2
             correspond to B l and B2, respectively. The first block ends with an unconditional
             branch to L2, and we assume that the block beginning with L2 has no other pre­
             decessors. The transformed code in Figure 18.4(b) has replaced the goto L2 with a




             (a)                              (b)
 FIG. 18.3 (a) An example for straightening, and (b) the result of applying the transformation.


             LI: . . .                          LI: . . .
                 a <- b + c                         a <- b + c
                 goto L2                            b <- c * 2
                                                    a <- a + 1
                                                    if (c > 0) goto L3
                                                    goto L5
             L6: . . .                          L6: . . .
                 goto L4                            goto L4
             L2: b    c * 2
                 a <- a + 1
                 if (c > 0) goto L3
             L5: . . .                          L5: . . .
             (a)                                (b)
 FIG. 18.4 mir code versions of the example code in Figure 18.3.
584            C on trol-Flow and Low -Level O p tim ization s


               copy o f the block beginning with L2 and has deleted the original copy of that block.
               N ote that since the copied block ends with a conditional transfer, it needs to have
               a branch to the fall-through path from the original block placed at the end o f it.
               Clearly, straightening has the greatest benefit if the copied block ends with an uncon­
               ditional branch also, since it then does not require a new branch for the fall-through
               path and may enable straightening to be applied again.
                    Straightening can be generalized to pairs o f blocks such that the first ends with a
               conditional branch and the second has no other predecessors. If it is known that one
               path is more likely to be taken than the other, it can be made the fall-through path
               and, if necessary, the condition tested can be inverted. In m ost implementations,
               this is alm ost always faster than m aking the less likely path the fall-through. For
               architectures (or implementations) with static branch prediction (see Section 18.11),
               this requires that we predict that the branch falls through rather than branching.
                    ican code to perform straightening is given in Figure 18.5, and the auxil­
               iary routine F u se _ B lo c k s( ) that is used in the process is in Figure 18.6. The


               procedure Straighten(nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred)
                  nblocks: inout integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1 •-nblocks] of integer
                  Block: inout array [1**nblocks] of array of [••] of LIRInst
                  Succ, Pred: inout integer —> set of integer
               begin
                  change := true: boolean
                  i, j: integer
                  while change do
                     change := false
                     i := 1
                     while i ^ nblocks do
                        if |Succ(i)| = 1 & Pred(^Succ(i)) * {i} then
                           j := ♦Succ(i)
                                 Fuse_Blocks(nblocks, n in s t s , Block, Succ, Pred, i , j )
                                 change := true
                            fi
                            i += 1
                       od
                  od
               end      || Straighten

  FIG. 18.5    ican code to perform straightening of basic-block pairs.



               procedure Fuse.Blocks(nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred,i,j)
                  nblocks: inout integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1**nblocks] of integer
                  Block: inout array [1**nblocks] of array of [••] of LIRInst
                  Succ, Pred: inout integer —> set of integer
                  i, j : in integer

  FIG. 18.6 The routine F u se_ B lock s( ) used by S tr a ig h te n ( ).
             Section 18.3     If Simplifications                                                       585

             begin
                k, 1: integer
                 label: Label
                 if Block[i][ninsts[i]].kind = goto then
                    k := ninsts[i] - 1
                 else
                    k := ninsts[i]
                 fi
                 if Block[j][1].kind * label then
                    k += 1
                    Block [i] [k]    Block [j] [1]
                fi
                for 1 := 2 to ninsts[j] do
                    k +« 1
                    Block [i] [k] := Block [j] [1]
                od
                 if Block[i][k].kind * goto then
                    label := Fall_Through(j,ninsts,Block)
                    ninsts [i] := k + 1
                    Block[i][ninsts[i]]       <kind:goto,lbl:label)
                fi
                ninsts[j]       0
                Succ(i) := Succ(j)
                Elim_Unreach_Code(nblocks,ninsts,Block,Pred,Succ)
             end      |I Fuse.Blocks

 FIG. 18.6   (continued)


             call Fall_T hrough(/,ninsts,Block) returns the label of the block that execution
             would fall through to after executing block /; if there is none, it supplies one and
             returns its value.


18.3         I f Sim plification s
             I f simplifications apply to conditional constructs one or both o f whose arm s are
             empty. This may result from code hoisting or other optim izing transform ations or
             may be present in the source code to begin with, especially if it w as generated
             by a program rather than directly by a person. This section describes three such
             simplifications that have to do with empty arm s o f a conditional, constant-valued
             conditions, and common subexpressions in dependent conditionals.
                   If either the then or e l s e part o f an i f construct is empty, the corresponding
             branch can be eliminated. If the th en part o f an i f - t h e n - e l s e is empty, we reverse
             the sense o f the condition, so the branch for the th en part can be removed. If both
             parts are empty, we remove the entire control structure and retain only as much of
             the condition com putation as cannot be determined to be free o f live side effects.
                   A second control-flow simplification that applies to i f s arises from constant­
             valued conditions. A constant-valued condition autom atically m akes one arm o f the
586           Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations




             (a)                                              (b)
  FIG. 18.7 (a) An example with a condition that is a common subexpression, and (b) the result of
            removing the dead arm of the i f .


              i f unexecutable and hence removable. If it is the only arm, it makes the entire i f
              construct removable, as long as the condition computation has no live side effects.
                   A third control-flow simplification that applies to i f s is the occurrence of com­
              mon subexpressions as conditions in an i f and in a subsequent dependent i f ; of
              course, the values of the variables involved must not have been changed between the
              tests. Such a case is illustrated in Figure 18.7. The test (a > d) or bool at the end of
              block B2 is guaranteed to be satisfied because a > d was satisfied in block B1 if we
              have gotten to B2, and neither a nor d has been changed in between. Thus, the test in
              B2 and all of block B4 can be removed. As in this case, this simplification may make
              straightening applicable.


18.4          Loop Simplifications
             A loop whose body is empty can be eliminated, as long as the iteration-control code
             has no live side effects. If the iteration-control code has side effects, they may be
             simple enough that they can be replaced by nonlooping code. In particular, if the
             loop simply increments or decrements the loop-control variable by a constant and
             checks it against a constant final value, the final value can be computed at compile
             time and a statement that assigns it to the variable can be inserted in place of the
             loop.
                 The second and third simplifications discussed in the preceding section for i f s
             also apply to loops and to nests of i f s within loops and vice versa.
                 Another simplification that applies to loops is that some of them have simple
             enough loop-control code that it is possible to determine how many times they will
             be executed and, if the number is small enough, they can profitably be unrolled into
             Section 18.5     Loop Inversion                                                      587

                 s <- 0                             s     <-0                  i <- 4
                 i <- 0                             i     <-0                  s <- 10
             L2: if i > 4 goto LI                   i     <-i + 1
                 i <- i + 1                         s     <-s + i
                 s <- s + i                         i     <-i + 1
                 goto L2                            s     <-s + i
             LI:                                    i     <-i + 1
                                                    s     <-s + i
                                                    i     <-i + 1
                                                    s     <-s + i
             (a)                                    (b)                        (c)
 FIG. 18.8 (a) An example of a loop that can be turned into (b) straight-line code and (c) executed
           at compile time.


             branchless code. In some cases, the resulting code can be executed at compile time,
             as in Figure 18.8.



18.5         Loop Inversion
             Loop inversion, in source-language terms, transforms a w hile loop into a r e p e a t
             loop. In other words, it moves the loop-closing test from before the body of the loop
             to after it. In its simplest form, loop inversion requires that we either determine that
             the loop is entered, i.e., that the loop body is executed at least once and hence that
             it is safe to move the instruction, or else it requires that we generate a test before
             the entry to the loop to determine whether it is entered. This has the advantage that
             only one branch instruction need be executed to close the loop, rather than one to
             get from the end back to the beginning and another at the beginning to perform the
             test.
                   Determining that the loop is entered may be as simple as observing that the loop
             is a Fortran 77 do loop or a Pascal f o r loop with constant bounds and that the upper
             one exceeds the lower one, or it may require proving data-flow-analytic facts about
             the values of the bound expressions and/or the iteration variable. Loop inversion
             transforms a loop with a conditional branch at the top and an unconditional closing
             branch at the bottom into one with just a conditional closing branch at the bottom
             that tests the negation of the original condition.
                   Figure 18.9 shows an example of loop inversion in C. In (a), we have a C
             f o r loop and in (b), we have its expansion as a w hile loop. Since its termination
             condition is initially false, its body is executed at least once, so it can be transformed
             into the re p e a t loop shown in (c).
                   An important subcase of loop inversion concerns nested loops with the range
             of the inner loop’s iteration-control variable being a non-empty subset of the range
             of the outer loops, as shown in the Fortran 77 code in Figure 18.10. In this case,
             the inner loop must be executed at least once whenever the outer loop is executed.
             Hence, loop inversion definitely applies to the inner loop.
588           Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


                                                                     i = 0;
              fo r     ( i = 0;       i    < 10 0 ;   i+ + )         w h ile ( i < 10 0 )
              {      a [ i]    = i    + 1;                           {      a [ i]   = i   + 1;
                                                                            i+ + ;
              >                                                      }
              (a)                                                    (b)
              i = 0;
              re p e a t
              {    a [ i] = i + 1 ;
                   i+ + ;
              > u n t i l ( i >= 10 0 )

              (c)
  FIG* 18*9 An example of loop inversion in C.


              do i = l,n
                 do j = l,n
                    a(i,j) = a(i,j) + c * b(i)
                 enddo
              enddo
 FIG. 18.10 Nested loops with identical bounds in a Fortran 77 example.


                                                                     if    ( a > = b ) g o to L ;
                                                                     i = a;
              fo r     ( i = a;       i    < b;   i+ + )             rep eat
              {       c [ i]    = i       + 1;                       {      c [ i]   = i   + 1;
                                                                            i+ + ;
              }                                                      >
                                                                     u n t il   ( i >= b )


              (a)                                              (b)
 FIG. 18.11 Inverting a C loop that we cannot determine to be entered.


                   If we cannot determine that a loop is entered, we can place an i f ahead of
              its inverted form that checks the entry condition and branches around the loop.
              Figure 18.11 gives an example of this approach.


18.6          Unswitching
              Unswitching is a control-flow transformation that moves loop-invariant conditional
              branches out of loops. For example, in the Fortran 77 code in Figure 18.12(a), the
              predicate k .e q .2 is independent of the value of i. Moving the predicate test out
             Section 18.7     Branch Optimizations                                                 589

             do i = 1,100                       if (k.eq.2) then
                if (k.eq.2) then                    do i = 1,100
                    a(i) = a(i) + 1                      a(i) » a(i) + 1
                else                                 enddo
                    a(i) = a(i) - 1             else
                endif                               do i = 1,100
             enddo                                       a(i) = a(i) - 1
                                                    enddo
                                                endif
             (a)                                (b)
FIG. 18.12 (a) Fortran 77 code with a loop-invariant predicate nested in a loop, and (b) the result
           of unswitching it.


             do i = 1,100                                           if (k.eq.2) then
                if ((k.eq.2).and.(a(i).gt.0)) then                       do i = 1,100
                   a(i) = a(i) + 1                                           if (a(i).gt.O) then
                endif                                                            a(i) = a(i) + 1
             enddo                                                           endif
                                                                         enddo
                                                                    else
                                                                         i = 101
                                                                    endif
             (a)                                                    (b)
FIG. 18.13 Unswitching a conditional without an e ls e part.


             of the loop produces the code shown in Figure 18.12(b). While this increases code
             space, it reduces the number of instructions executed. Note that the conditional
             must be nested directly inside the looping construct for the transformation to be
             applicable. The example in Figure 18.13 illustrates two aspects of unswitching: first,
             the invariant condition need not account for the entire predicate; and second, if the
             conditional has no e ls e part, it is essential to supply one in the transformed code
             that sets the loop-control variable to its final value, unless it can be shown to be dead.


18.7         Branch Optimizations
             There are several kinds of branch optimizations that are generally postponed to the
             latter phases of the compilation process, once the shape of the final code has been
             determined. We discuss some of them in this section.
                  Branches to branch instructions are remarkably common, especially if a rela­
             tively simple-minded code-generation strategy is used. Detecting such situations is
             trivial—we simply check what instruction appears at the target of each branch—as
             long as we do so before filling branch delay slots (for architectures that have them).
             The cases are as follows:
590         Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


       1.   An unconditional branch to an unconditional branch can be replaced by a branch to
            the latter’s target.
       2.   A conditional branch to an unconditional branch can be replaced by the correspond­
            ing conditional branch to the latter branch’s target.
       3.   An unconditional branch to a conditional branch can be replaced by a copy of the
            conditional branch.
       4.   A conditional branch to a conditional branch can be replaced by a conditional
            branch with the former’s test and the latter’s target, as long as the latter condition is
            true whenever the former one is.
            For e x a m p l e , in t h e m i r s e q u e n c e
                          if a = 0 goto LI

                  LI: if a >= 0 goto L2

                  L2: . . .

            th e f ir s t b r a n c h c a n b e c h a n g e d t o   if a = 0 g o t o L2, s in c e a > = 0 is t r u e i f a = 0 is.
                 Another case that is relatively common in code generated by standard code­
            generation strategies is an unconditional branch whose target is the next instruction.
            This case is trivial to recognize and the optimization is obvious: delete the branch.
            Equally obvious is a situation in which a block ends with a conditional branch to the
            second following instruction, followed by an unconditional branch to some other
            target. In this case, we reverse the sense of the conditional branch, change its target
            to the target of the unconditional branch, and delete the latter. For example,
                      if a = 0 goto LI
                      goto L2
                  LI: . . .

            becomes
                      if a != 0 goto L2
                  LI: . . .


18.8        Tail Merging or Cross Jumping
            Tail merging> also known as cross jumping, is an optimization that always saves
            code space and may also save time. It searches for basic blocks in which the last few
            instructions are identical and that continue execution at the same location, either
            by one branching to the instruction following the other or by both branching to the
            same location. What the optimization does is to replace the matching instructions of
            one of the blocks by a branch to the corresponding point in the other. Obviously, if
            one of them ends without a branch, it is the preferred one to be left unmodified. For
            example, the code in Figure 18.14(a) would be transformed into the code in (b).
                    Section 18.9            Conditional Moves                                                                          591

                          rl <- r2 + r3                                 rl <- r2 + r3
                          r4 <- r3 shl 2                                goto L2
                          r2 <- r2 + 1
                          r2 <- r4 - r2
                          goto LI

                          r5 <- r4 - 6                               r5 <-          r4 -              6
                          r4 <- r3 shl 2                         L2: r4             r3 shl 2
                          r2 <- r2 + 1                               r2 <-          r2 +              1
                          r2 <- r4 - r2                              r2             r4 -              r2
                                                                 LI:
                    (a)                                          (b)
FIG. 18.14 (a) A l i r c o d e e x a m p l e f o r t a il m e r g in g , a n d (b ) th e r e s u l t o f t r a n s f o r m i n g it.


                        To do tail merging, we simply scan backward through the predecessors of blocks
                    that have multiple predecessors looking for common sequences o f instructions and
                    we replace all but one such copy with a branch to the beginning of the remaining
                    one (usually creating a new basic block in the process).



18.9                 Conditional Moves
                    Conditional moves are instructions that copy a source to a target if and only if a
                    specified condition is satisfied. They are found in several modern architectures and
                    implementations, such as sparc -V9 and the Pentium Pro. They can be used to replace
                    some simple branching code sequences with code that includes no branches. For
                    example, the code in Figure 18.15(a), which computes the maximum of a and b and
                    stores it in c, can be replaced by the code in Figure 18.15(b).
                        The approach to replacing branching code by conditional moves is pattern
                    matching on the intermediate code. In the simplest case, the original code must have
                    the form shown in Figure 18.16(a) or Figure 18.17(a) and it may be replaced by
                    the equivalent code in Figure 18.16(b) or Figure 18.17(b), respectively. O f course,
                    sequences with more than one assignment may be matched and replaced also, but
                    these simple patterns cover most of the cases found in real code.


                          if a > b goto LI                              tl <- a > b
                        c <- b                                         c <- b
                        goto L2                                        c «-(tl) a
                    LI: c <- a
                    L2:
                    (a)                                                (b)
FIG. 18.15 Code to compute the maximum of a and b (a) with branches and (b) with conditional
           moves.
592           Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


                         if opdl relop opdl goto label 1             reg    opd3
                         reg    opd3                                 t <- opdl relop opdl
                         goto labell                                 reg <-(£) opd4
              label!: reg <- opd4
              /zat£?e/2:
              (a)                                                    (b)
 FIG. 18.16 (a) Example code pattern for which branches may be replaced by conditional moves,
            and (b) the result of the replacement.

                         reg <- opd3                                 reg <- opd3
                         if opdl relop opdl goto labell              t <- opdl !relop opdl
                         reg <- opd4                                 reg <-(*) opd4
              lab ell:
              (a)                                                    (b)
 FIG. 18.17 (a) Another example code pattern for which branches may be replaced by conditional
            moves, and (b) the result of the replacement.


18.10        Dead-Code Elimination
             A variable is dead if it is not used on any path from the location in the code where
             it is defined to the exit point of the routine in question. An instruction is dead if
             it computes only values that are not used on any executable path leading from the
             instruction. If a dead variable’s value is assigned to a local variable, the variable
             and the instruction that assigns to it are dead if the variable is not used on any
             executable path to the procedure’s exit (including its being returned as the value
             of the procedure). If it is assigned to a variable with wider visibility, it generally
             requires interprocedural analysis to determine whether it is dead, unless there is
             another instruction that assigns to the same variable on every executable path from
             its point of computation.
                  Programs may include dead code before optimization, but such code is much
             more likely to arise from optimization; strength reduction (see Section 14.1.2) is an
             example of an optimization that produces dead code, and there are many others.
             Many optimizations create dead code as part of a division of labor principle: keep
             each optimization phase as simple as possible so as make it easy to implement and
             maintain, leaving it to other phases to clean up after it.
                   Our determination of dead instructions uses an optimistic approach. It begins by
             marking all instructions that compute essential values, where a value is essential if it
             either is definitely returned or output by the procedure or it affects a storage location
             that may be accessible from outside the procedure. From there, the algorithm itera­
             tively marks instructions that contribute to the computation of essential values. When
             that process has stabilized, all unmarked instructions are dead and may be deleted.
                   One subtlety in the algorithm is that it detects variables that are used only to
             define new values for themselves; such variables are dead, since they contribute
             nothing to the program containing them except wasted time and space. For example,
             in the code in Figure 18.18, the variable i is inessential since it contributes only to
             computing new values for itself.
              Section 18.10     Dead-Code Elimination                                               593




FIG. 18.18 Variable i contributes only to defining itself and thus is inessential.

                   Identification of dead code can be formulated as a data-flow analysis, but it is
              easier to use a worklist and du- and ud-chains for it. The approach is as follows:


         1.   Initialize the worklist to the set of block-index pairs of instructions that are essential.
              (In Figure 18.19, this is the set of </,/> such that MarkD'] [/] = tru e on entry to the
              procedure.)
         2.   Remove an </,/> pair from the worklist. For each variable v used in that instruction,
              mark each instruction in its ud-chain \JD(v,</,/>) and place the instruction’s block-
              index pair on the worklist.
         3.   If the </,/> instruction is an assignment, say, i / ^ e x p , then for each instruction
              position <&,/> in its du-chain DU(i/,< /,/> ), if instruction <&,/> is an i f , mark it
              and add <&,/> to the worklist.
         4.   Repeat the last two steps until the worklist is empty.
         5.   Remove from the procedure each instruction that is unmarked and each basic block
              that has become empty.


              ican code for this process is shown in Figure 18.19. The routine V ars_U sed(Block,
              x ) returns the set of variables used as operands in instruction Block [x § l] |>@2],
              and Delete_Unmarked_Insts( ) uses d e le te _ in st ( ) to delete each unmarked in­
              struction and adjusts Mark [] [] to reflect the deletions. We could also check whether
              any control-flow transformations are enabled as a result or we could leave that to a
              separate pass; such transformations might include the i f simplification and empty-
              loop elimination transformations discussed in Sections 18.3 and 18.4, respectively.
                   One point that requires care is that we must be certain that an operation that
              produces a dead value is not being performed for a side effect, such as setting
              the condition codes. For example, a sparc integer subtract instruction that targets
              register rO and that sets the condition codes is not dead if there is a future use of the
              resulting condition codes’ value.
594           Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


              UdDu = integer x integer
              UdDuChain = (Symbol x UdDu) — > set of UdDu

              procedure Dead_Code_Elim(nblocks,ninsts,Block,Mark,UD,DU,Succ,Pred)
                  nblocks: inout integer
                  ninsts: inout array [1•-nblocks] of integer
                  Block: inout array [1••nblocks] of array [••] of MIRInst
                  Mark: in array [1**nblocks] of array [••] of boolean
                  UD, DU: in UdDuChain
                  Succ, Pred: inout integer — > set of integer
              begin
                  i, j : integer
                  x, y: integer x integer
                  v: Var
                  Worklist: set of (integer x integer)
                  || set of positions of essential instructions
                  Worklist := {<i,j> e integer x integer where Mark[i][j]}
                  while Worklist * 0 do
                       x := ♦Worklist; Worklist -= {x>
                       I| mark instructions that define values used by
                       I| required instructions
                       for each v e Vars_Used(Block,x) do
                           for each y e UD(v,x) do
                               if !Mark[y@l] [y@2] then
                                   Mark[y@l][y@2] := true
                                   Worklist u= {y>
                               fi
                           od
                       od
                       I| mark conditionals that use values defined by
                       I| required instructions
                       if Has.Left(Block[x@l][x@2].kind) then
                           for each y e DU(Block[x@l][x@2].left,x) do
                               if !Mark[y@l][y@2] & Block[y@l][y@2].kind
                                   e {binif,unif,valif,bintrap,untrap,valtrap} then
                                   Mark[y@l] [y@2] := true
                                   Worklist u= {y}
                               fi
                           od
                       fi
                  od
                  Delete_Unmarked_Insts(nblocks,ninsts,Block,Succ,Pred,Mark)
              end     II Dead_Code_Elim

 FIG. 18.19 i can routine to detect and remove dead code.
            Section 18.10        Dead-Code Elimination                                   595




FIG. 18.20 An example for dead-code elimination.

                As an example of the algorithm applied to mir code, consider the flowgraph in
            Figure 18.20. The ud- and du-chains for this flowgraph are as follows:
                  Variable
                  Definition        Du-Chain

                  i in <B1,1>       {<B2,1»
                  i in <B2,1>       {<B2,1>,<B4,1»
                  j in <B1,2>       {<B2,1>,<B2,2>,<]
                  j in <B2,3>       {<B2,1>,<B2(2>,<]
                  k in <B1,3>       {<B3,1»
                  k in <B3,1>       {<B3,1»
                  1 in <B2,2>       {<B3,2»
                  n in <B1,4>       {<B2,4»
            and
                  Variable Use      Ud-Chain

                  i in <B2,1>       {<B1,1>,<B2,1»
                  i in <B4,1>       {<B2,1»
                  j in <B2,1>       {<B1,2>,<B2,3»
                  j in <B2,2>       {<B1,2>,<B2,3»
                  j in <B2,3>       {<B1,2>,<B2,3»
                  j in <B2,4>       {<B2,3»
                  j in <B3,1>       {<B2,3»
                  j in <B4,1>       {<B2,3»
                  kin <B3,1>        {<B1,3>,<B3,1»
                  1 in <B3,2>       {<B2,2»
                  nin <B2,4>        {<B1,4»
596   Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


          Initially, the set of essential instructions consists of the print and the return,
      so only Mark[B3] [2] = Mark[B4] [1] = true, and Worklist = {<B3,2>,<B4,1>}.
           Now we begin marking instructions that contribute to the essential instructions.
      First we remove x » <B3,2> from the worklist, resulting in Worklist = {<B4,1»,
      and find that Vars_Used (Block, <B3,2>) = {1}. So we check the one member of the
      ud-chain for 1 in <B3,2>, namely, <B2,2>, set Mark[B2] [2] = true, and add <B2,2>
      to the worklist, resulting in Worklist = {<B4,1>,<B2,2».
           Next we determine that Has_Left(Block[B3] [2] .kind) = false, so we move
      on to the next element of the worklist. W e remove x = <B4,1> from the worklist,
      leaving it with the value Worklist = {<B2,2», and find that Vars_Used(Block,
      <B4,1>) = {i,j>. So we set v = i and check each member of UD(i,<B4,l>) =
      {<B2,1>>. W e set Mark[B2] [1] = true and add <B2,1> to the worklist, resulting
      in Worklist = {<B2,2>,<B2,1>}. Next we set v = j, and find that UD(j ,<B4,1>) =
      {<B2,3>> resulting in setting Mark[B2] [3] = true and adding <B2,3> to the
      worklist, so Worklist = {<B2,2>,<B2,1>,<B2,3)}. Next we determine that
      Has_Left(Block[B4] [1] .kind) = false, so we move on to the next element of
      the worklist.
           N o w we remove x = <B2,2> from the worklist, leaving it with the value
      Worklist = {<B2,1>,<B2,3>>, and find that Vars_Used(Block,<B2,2>) = {j}. So
      we set v = j and check each member of UD(j,<B2,2>) = {<B1,2>,<B2,3». This
      results in setting Mark[Bl] [2] = true (Mark[B2] [3] is already true) and adding
      <B1,2> to the worklist, i.e., Worklist = {<B2,1>,<B2,3>,<B1,2».
           Next we remove <B2,1> from the worklist, leaving Worklist = {<B2,3>,
      <B1,2>>. Vars_Used(Block,<B2,1>) = {i,j>, so we examine UD(i,<B2,l>) =
      {<B1,1>,<B2,1». W e set Mark[Bl] [1] = true and put <B1,1> on the worklist,
      resulting in Worklist = {<B2,3>,<B1,2),<B1,1». Mark[B2] [1] is already set to
      true, so we proceed to the next element of the worklist. N o w UD(j,<B2,l>) =
      {<B1,2>,<B2,3», both of which are already marked, so we move on.
          Next we remove <B2,3> from the worklist, leaving it with the value Worklist
      = {<B1,2>>. N o w Vars_Used(Block, <B2,3>) = {j>, so we check whether either of
      Mark[Bl] [2] and Mark[B2] [3] is marked. Both are already marked, so we proceed
      to determine that Has.Left(Block[B2] [3] .left) = true, so we check each of
      Block [B2] [1], Block [B2] [2], Block [B2] [3], Block [B2] [4], Block [B3] [1], and
      Block [B4] [1] to determine whether the instructions in any of those positions are
      conditionals and unmarked. Only Block [B2] [4] is, so we set Mark[B2] [4] = true
      and add <B2,4> to the worklist, resulting in Worklist = {<B1,2),<B2,4».
          N o w we remove <B1,2> from the worklist, leaving itwith the value Worklist =
      {<B1,1>,<B2,4>}. N o w Vars_Used(Block, <B1,2» = 0 and DU(Block[Bl] [2] ,j)
      = {<B2,1>,<B2,2), <B2,3)}, all of which are already marked.
          Next we remove <B1,1> from the worklist, leaving it with the value Work-
      list = {<B2,4». N o w Vars_Used(Block,<B1,1>) = 0, DU(Block[Bl] [1] ,i) =
      {<B2,1>}, and <B2,1> is already marked.
          Finally, we remove <B2,4> from the worklist, leaving it empty. Mark[B2] [4] is
      already true, so the algorithm terminates with the value of Mark being as shown in
      Figure 18.21(a) and the flowgraph resulting from performing dead-code elimination
      is shown in Figure 18.21(b).
              Section 18.11        Branch Prediction                                             597




              Block     Position       Value

              B1                       true
                                       true
                                       false
                                       true
              B2                       true
                                       true
                                       true
                                                                                           B4
                                       true
             B3                        false
                                       true
             B4                        true

              (a)                                      (b)
 FIG. 18.21 (a) The Mark table after identifying dead code and (b) the flowgraph in Figure 18.20
            after dead-code elimination.

                   Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen [KnoR94] have extended dead-code elimination to
              the elimination of partially dead code, where “ partial” is used in the same sense as in
              partial-redundancy elimination, i.e., dead on some paths but possibly not on others.



18.11        Branch Prediction
              In this and the following section, we discuss optimizations that are almost always de­
              ferred until machine code has been generated. For this reason, they are often known
              as postpass optimizations. Another common term for some of them is peephole op­
              timizations, because they can be carried out by moving a small window or peephole
              across the generated code or its dependence DAG to look for opportunities to per­
              form them. Note that using the dependence DAG facilitates finding pairs (or larger
              groups) of instructions that are connected by the functions they perform, such as load­
              ing an array element via a pointer and incrementing the pointer to the next element.
                   Branch prediction refers to predicting, either statically or dynamically, whether
              a conditional branch causes a transfer of control or not. Accurate prediction of
              branches is important because it allows a processor to fetch instructions on the
              continuation path from an instruction cache into an instruction prefetch buffer, or
              from main memory or a second-level cache into the instruction cache, ahead of the
              execution of the branch that causes the transfer of control to them. As cache delays
              become longer relative to cycle time, prediction becomes more and more important.
                   Dynamic methods of branch prediction include a variety of schemes, ranging
              from a simple cache of the addresses of conditional branches and whether each
              branched the last time it was executed, to larger caches that contain, for a set of
598   Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


      recent branches, the first few instructions at the target (the fall-through path need
      not be cached, because the ordinary instruction-fetch mechanism applies to it). Of
      course, such schemes require hardware resources to implement and may be quite
      complex—for example, the latter scheme needs logic to invalidate a cache entry
      if either a branch instruction or the code at its target or fall-through is changed
      dynamically. Also, simpler schemes, such as the first one mentioned above, may not
      be very effective—it may be the case, for example, that a particular branch alternates
      between branching and not branching each time it is executed.
            Static branch-prediction methods require much less hardware to implement and
      have been shown to be almost as good as dynamic prediction. Some architectures,
      such as sparc-V9, provide conditional branches with a means for specifying a static
      branch prediction; some implementations of others, such as the Rios version of
      power , have unequal delays for the taken and fall-through paths, so that choosing
      the more likely path to be the one with less delay has significant benefit.
           As a measure of the quality of static branch prediction, we define the perfect
      static predictor as a predictor that by some means, perhaps oracular, predicts each
      conditional branch instruction statically to branch or not branch in such a way as to
      be correct at least 50% of the time for that branch. Thus, a perfect static predictor
      is right 50% of the time if a branch causes a transfer of control exactly half the time
      and does better than that if it takes one path (either path) more often than the other.
      If the branch either always branches or never branches, it will be right 100% of the
      time. The perfect static predictor, when computed dynamically over all branches in
      a given program, provides an upper bound on how well any static predictor can do
      for that program.
           Some simple heuristics do better than average. For example, predicting a back­
      ward conditional branch to be taken is relatively successful, because most backward
      branches close loops and most loops are executed more than once before exiting.
      Similarly, predicting forward branches not to branch can be reasonably successful,
      since some fraction of them test for exceptional conditions and branch around the
      code that handles them.
           Much better heuristics for static branch prediction are, for example, discussed
      by Ball and Larus [BalL93], who improve on the simple backward heuristic men­
      tioned above by defining loop branches more exactly. Suppose that we are given
      a flowgraph and have determined its natural loops (see Section 7.4). Define a loop
      branch to be one that has an outgoing edge in the flowgraph that is either a back edge
      or an exit edge from the loop;1 a nonloop branch is any other conditional branch. To
      predict loop branches statically, we simply choose the back edge. This can be from
      moderately to very successful for real programs.
           For nonloop branches, several simple heuristics contribute to being able to
      predict them much more successfully. For example, the opcode heuristic checks
      for branches based on integer comparison to zero or a negative integer value and
      equality tests between floating-point values. It predicts that integer branches for



      1. As Ball and Larus note, it is possible for both outgoing edges to be back edges. They indicate
      that they have not observed this to be the case in practice, but that if it did occur we should choose
      the edge for the inner loop to be predicted.
        Section 18.12     Machine Idioms and Instruction Combining                            599


        nonpositive values and floating-point equality branches do not branch, since the
        former are frequently used as error indicators and the latter are rarely true. The loop
        heuristic checks whether one successor basic block does not postdominate the block
        containing the branch and is neither a loop header nor a preheader. If a successor
        block satisfies this heuristic, the branch to it is predicted to branch.
            This is an area in which research is ongoing. See Section 18.14 at the end of this
        chapter for references to more recent work.



18.12   Machine Idiom s and Instruction Com bining
        There are several varieties of optimization that can only reasonably be applied once
        one has generated machine-specific code or that are best left to near the end of the
        compilation process. If one does global optimization on a low-level intermediate
        code, they can be performed earlier, but care needs to be taken in some cases to
        make the most effective choices in performing them. An example of this is the case
        discussed below of combining into a single instruction a memory reference via a
        pointer to an array element and incrementing the pointer to the next element. While
        some architectures— such as p a - r i s c , p o w e r , and PowerPC— allow this, it may not
        be the best choice, since induction-variable optimizations may remove the increment­
        ing instruction, so we do instruction combining near the end of compilation.
             Machine idioms are instructions or instruction sequences for a particular archi­
        tecture that provide a more efficient way of performing a computation than one
        might use if one were compiling for a more generic architecture. Many machine id­
        ioms are instances of instruction combining, i.e., the replacement of a sequence of
        instructions by a single one that achieves the same effect.
             Since all R i s e s execute most computational instructions in a single cycle, most
        but not all machine idioms for R i s e s combine pairs of instructions into single ones.
        For other architectures— such as the VAX, the M otorola M 68000, and the Intel
        386 family—there are machine idioms that replace single instructions by others that
        require fewer cycles and others that combine several instructions into one.
             In this section, we present some examples of machine idioms for several architec­
        tures. The examples are by no means exhaustive— they are simply intended to suggest
        the range of possibilities. In most cases, we focus on a particular architecture. The pri­
        mary technique for recognizing opportunities to use machine idioms is pattern match­
        ing. The search has two main parts. The first part is looking for instructions whose
        purpose can be achieved by faster, more specialized instructions. The second part be­
        gins by looking for an instruction that may be the first of a group that can be combined
        into a shorter or faster sequence; finding one triggers a search for the other instruc­
        tion^) that are needed to form the appropriate group. Unless the target architecture
        allows functionally independent instructions to be combined into one (as, in some
        cases, was true for the Stanford m i p s architecture), the searching can be done most
        efficiently and effectively on the dependence DAG, rather than on straight-line code.
             For all Rise architectures, there is the opportunity to simplify code that con­
        structs full-width (i.e., 32-bit or 64-bit) constants, if the constants are discovered to
        be short enough to fit in the immediate fields provided in instructions. While it is
        desirable to completely avoid generating instruction sequences that construct long
600   Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


      constants when they’re not needed, it is often more desirable to simplify code gen­
      eration by generating them and leaving it to postpass optimization to simplify them
      where possible. For example, the sparc sequence
          sethi °/0hi (const) ,rl8
          or    r 18,°/0lo(const) ,rl8
      which puts the value const into r l 8 can be simplified if its high-order 20 bits are all
      zeros or all ones to
          add       rO,const,r18
           Next, consider multiplication of an integer variable by an integer constant. Sup­
      pose, in particular, that we are multiplying a variable in register r l by 5 and putting
      the result in r2. In most architectures, we could do this by using the integer multiply
      instruction, but it is generally a multicycle instruction and, in some machines such
      as pa-risc , it requires moving the operands to floating-point registers and the result
      back to an integer register. But there is a much less expensive way. For pa-risc , we
      can simply generate the one-cycle instruction
          SH2ADD      rl,rl,r2
      which shifts r l left two bits and adds its original value to that. For the others, we
      can use a sequence corresponding to the lir instructions
          r2    rl shl 2
          r2 <- r2 + rl
         For sparc , we can combine a subtract that produces a value with a test that
      compares its two operands, so that, e.g.,
          sub      rl,r2,r3

          subcc rl,r2,r0
          bg    LI
      becomes
          subcc rl,r2,r3

          bg     LI
          For m ips , we can determine whether two values (assumed to be in r l and r2)
      have the same sign without any branches by using the sequence
          slti    r3,rl,0
          slti    r4,r2,0
          and     r3,r3,r4

      If the values have the same sign, r3 ends up equal to 1; otherwise, it equals 0.
           In the Motorola 88000, pa-risc , and the Intel 386 architecture family, one can
      access parallel arrays of bytes, halfwords, words, and doublewords with indexes
      that increment by 1 by using scaled loads and stores. If r2 and r3 point to arrays of
             Section 18.12                  Machine Idioms and Instruction Combining                                                601


             doublew ords and halfw ords, respectively, and r l indexes the elements o f the arrays,
             then elements o f the two arrays can be loaded and the index updated to access the
             next elements o f both arrays by the M otorola 88000 sequence
                    ld.d         r4,r2 [rl]
                    ld.h         r6,r3[rl]
                    add          rl,rl,l

             in s te a d o f r e q u ir in g t w o s e p a r a te in d e x e s , o n e in c r e m e n tin g b y 2 a n d th e o t h e r b y
             8 , a n d p e rh a p s a th ir d in d e x f o r c o u n tin g ite r a tio n s o f th e lo o p .
                 In p a - r i s c , p o w e r , and PowerPC, one can do a load or store with increment
             and replace the value in one of the registers that is used to form the memory address
             with the new value o f the address. In the latter two, the update always occurs after
             the load or store, while for p a - r i s c , it can be specified to occur before or after the
             operation. Thus, for exam ple, one can access successive elements o f an array of
             halfwords in PowerPC by executing
                    lhau          r3,2(rl)

             r e p e a t e d l y a n d in    pa -r is c   by

                    LDHS,MA             2(0,rl),r3

                  For p a - r i s c , one can terminate a loop with an add and branch instruction that
             adds a register and either an immediate or a register, puts the result in the first
             register, and then branches if the result satisfies a specified condition. Thus, a loop
             over an array indexed by rl, with r2 containing the final value o f the index, can be
             terminated by the instruction
                    ADDBT,<=                r2,rl,L1

             where LI labels the first instruction o f the loop body.
                 An instruction combiner may increase the number o f superscalar instruction
             groups that are required to execute a sequence o f instructions. For exam ple, suppose
             we have an implementation with three pipelines (two integer and one floating­
             point) and an instruction sequence that can be grouped as shown in Figure 18.22(a),
             where the sub must precede the b r and the add2 must follow the cmp. Com bining



             Int           Int              Fit                Int     Int         Fit

             load          addl             fltl               load    addl        fltl
             cmp           sub              flt2               sub     —           f lt2
             br            add2             f lt 3             cmpbr   —           f lt3
                                                               add2    ?           ?
             (a)                                               (b)

FIG. 18.22   (a) Example of code for a superscalar processor for which instruction combining can
             decrease performance, as shown in (b).
602     Control-Flow and Low-Level Optimizations


        the cmp and the br into a compare and branch instruction (cmpbr) results in the
        instructions requiring four issue slots, as shown in Figure 18.22(b), rather than
        the three slots they originally needed. This effect can be mitigated by making the
        instruction combiner and an instruction decomposer available as subroutines to
        the instruction scheduler, so that it can try the possible instruction sequences to
        determine which one produces the best schedule, but one needs to be careful to limit
        the extent of such attempts, since most scheduling problems are at least NP-hard.
              The reverse is also a possibility—including information about the pipeline struc­
        ture in the instruction combiner and structuring it to estimate the impact on sched­
        uling of the combinations it makes— but this is likely to significantly complicate the
        combiner and not to work well in practice, since scheduling has a much wider win­
        dow on the code than a peephole optimizer usually does, unless it also works on the
        basic-block DAG.
              As noted above, these are only a few examples of machine idioms. The diligent
        compiler writer will find many others by intimately getting to know the instruction
        set being compiled for and by inspecting examples of generated code.
              For cisc architecture implementations, there is sometimes a need for instruction
        decomposing, the inverse of instruction combining, which turns an instruction into
        a series of instructions that perform the same overall function. An example of this
        can be seen in the Intel 386 architecture-family code generated for the subroutine
        s i ( ) and the corresponding main program in Figures 21.23 and 21.24. The inlined
        code for the subroutine in the main program is cisc-style code, while that in the
        subroutine is Rise-style (and unrolled by a factor of four). Note that either of these
        could have been generated first and the other produced from it.




18.13   Wrap-Up
        This chapter has covered control-flow optimizations, unreachable- and dead-code
        elimination, and the remaining global optimizations that are best carried out on
        low-level code, namely, static branch prediction, machine idioms, and instruction
        combining. Some of these optimizations, such as dead-code elimination, may prof­
        itably be applied several times during compilation. Some are best carried out on
        low-level intermediate code or on a structured form of assembly or machine lan­
        guage.
             Most of these optimizations, other than dead-code elimination, have minimal
        impact when applied once to a particular code segment. However, applying them all
        to an entire procedure may result in substantial savings, especially if the ones that
        apply to loops are used heavily.
             The control-flow transformations that produce longer basic blocks have the
        potential to increase available instruction-level parallelism, which is particularly
        important for superscalar implementations.
             Dead-code elimination removes instructions that can be determined to have no
        effect on the result of a computation. It is an important optimization, not only be­
        cause some programs contain dead code as originally written, but also because many
             Section 18.13    Wrap-Up                                                         603




FIG. 18.23   Order of optimizations with control-flow and low-level optimizations in bold type.
             (continued)


             of the other optimizations create dead code. We recommend that it be performed
             several times during optimizing compilation, as shown in Figure 18.23.
                  Branch prediction continues to increase in importance as cache delays become
             longer relative to processor cycle time. Accurate prediction is important because it
             increases the chance that the processor will fetch the correct continuation path from
             the instruction cache or from another unit beyond it in the memory hierarchy.
                  The other optimizations discussed in this chapter are the postpass, or peephole,
             ones. They include machine idioms and instruction combining and are generally
             among the last optimizations performed and are always done after code generation.
604           Control-Flow and Low-Level O ptim izations




 FIG. 18.23   (continued)

              They can be performed by moving a small window or peephole across the generated
              code or over the dependence DAGs for the basic blocks to look for code sequences
              they apply to.
                  The suggested order of optimizations in an aggressive optimizing compiler is
              given in Figure 18.23; optimizations covered in this chapter are highlighted in bold
              type.


18.14         Further Reading
              Unswitching is first discussed in [AllC72a].
                  The dead-code detection algorithm given in Section 18.10 is derived from one
              developed by Kennedy [Kenn81].
                  Knoop, Riithing, and Steffen’s extension of dead-code elimination to eliminate
              partially dead code is found in [KnoR94].
                  Comparison of the branches actually taken to the perfect static predictor to
              determine the effectiveness of branch prediction schemes was developed by Ball
              and Larus [BalL93]. That paper also describes several useful heuristics for branch
              prediction. M ore recent papers, such as [Patt95] and [CalG95], describe still better
              heuristics.
                  The Stanford m ips architecture is described in [GilG83].
         Section 18.15     Exercises                                                          605

. 15     Exercises
   18.1 Write an i c a n procedure to detect and perform the i f simplifications discussed in
        Section 18.3.
   18.2 Write an i c a n procedure that detects opportunities for tail merging in l i r code and
        that transforms the code accordingly. Is there anything to be gained by searching the
        DAGs for the basic blocks for common sequences that end with leaves or for sets of
        independent instructions that occur as leaves or their predecessors?
   18.3 Give three examples of useful instruction sequences that can be made more efficient
        by using conditional moves.
   18.4 Show that the dead-code elimination algorithm in Figure 18.19 recognizes and
        eliminates definitions of sets of variables      v j, t/3 , . . . } that only contribute to
        defining each other and hence are not essential.
   18.5 Instrument the source code of a nontrivial-size program you have available to com­
        pute and print statistics for each conditional branch that indicate what fraction of
        the time it branches. Can you infer from the results any useful rules for static branch
        prediction?
   18.6 Design a pattern language for assembly-language instruction sequences that can be
        combined or transformed as machine idioms. You will need a way, for example, to
        represent registers abstractly so that you can require that the same register be used
        in two instructions without pinning it down to a specific register.
   18.7 Write a program that searches assembly language for opportunities to use instruction
        combining and machine idioms represented in the pattern language designed for
        Exercise 18.6 and that applies them to the code. The program should take as its
        input a file of patterns and a file of assembly language to which to apply them.
                                                                CHAPTER 19




        Interprocedural Analysis
               and Optimization




M
               odularity has long been regarded as a virtue in program construction—
               and rightly so, since proper decomposition into procedures encourages
               the creation of well-designed programs that are easier to understand
               and maintain. In recent years, object-oriented languages have pushed this tre
even further. While some languages, such as C++, provide the programmer with an
explicit way to declare that a procedure should be expanded in-line, most encourage
the view that a procedure consists of an interface and a black box implementing
it or, more generally, that a data type or class consists of an interface and one
or more black boxes that implement it. This approach encourages abstraction and
hence contributes to good program design and maintainability, but it also inhibits
optimization and so may result in less efficient code than would otherwise result.
Lacking interprocedural control- and data-flow information, one must generally
assume that a called procedure may use or change any variable it might be able
to access and that a procedure’s caller provides arbitrary values as parameters. Both
of these assumptions clearly inhibit optimization.
     Almost all the optimizations we have considered so far have been intraproce­
dural. That is, they are applied within a single procedure, without regard to the
calling context in which that procedure is used or the procedures it calls. Only tail-
call optimization (Section 15.1), procedure integration (Section 15.2), and inlining
(Section 15.3) are in any way interprocedural.
     Interprocedural optimizations are ones that use the calling relationships among
a set of procedures to drive optimizations in one or more of them or in how they
relate to each other. For example, if one could determine that every call to a pro­
cedure f ( i , j ,k) in a program passed the constant 2 as the value of i, this would
enable constant propagation of the 2 into f ( ) ’s code. Similarly, if one could deter­
mine that every call passed either 2 or 5 as the value of i and identify which calls
passed which value, one could replace f ( ) by two procedures f _2( ) and f _5( ) —
a process called procedure cloning—and the calls to f ( ) by calls to the appropriate

                                                                              607
608        Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


           one of them. Similarly, if one knows that a called procedure modifies only its own
           local variables and particular parameters, one may freely optimize the code around
           calls to it, as long as one takes into account the procedure’s known effects.
                As for the intraprocedural case, interprocedural optimization consists of a se­
           ries of phases that do control-flow analysis, data-flow analysis, alias analysis, and
           transformations. It differs from intraprocedural optimization in that many of the
           benefits of interprocedural analysis derive from improving the effectiveness and ap­
           plicability of optimizations within individual procedures, rather than transforming
           the relationships among procedures. In this chapter, we explore the following:
      1.   interprocedural control-flow analysis and, in particular, construction of a program’s
           control-flow graph;
      2.   several varieties of interprocedural data-flow analysis, including both flow-sensitive
           and flow-insensitive side-effect analysis and constant propagation;
      3.   interprocedural alias analysis;
      4.   how to use the information gained from interprocedural analysis to do optimization;
           and
      5.   interprocedural register allocation.
                We assume in the remainder of this chapter that all parameters are passed by
           reference, unless mentioned otherwise, and we leave it to the reader to adapt the
           methods discussed to other parameter-passing disciplines. Note that passing a non­
           pointer as a value parameter creates no aliases, while passing a pointer as a value
           parameter is closely akin to passing the object it points to by reference.
                Some studies suggest that interprocedural analysis is unproductive or too expen­
           sive to be worthwhile (see Section 19.10 for references). For example, Richardson
           and Ganapathi investigated the effectiveness of interprocedural optimization in com­
           parison to procedure integration. They found that procedure integration is very
           effective at enhancing optimization, but that compilation is slowed down signifi­
           cantly by it, often by as much as a factor of 10. On the other hand, the limited
           interprocedural analysis they did showed comparatively little benefit in optimiza­
           tion. Also, interprocedural analysis can be an expensive addition to a compiler and
           increases the complexity of the compiler. In general, the typical cost and impact of
           interprocedural analysis are, as yet, not well understood. Some evidence suggests
           that it is more valuable for parallelizing compilers than for compilers for sequential
           machines.
                Separate compilation impacts the effectiveness of interprocedural analysis and
           optimization, since one can’t determine the effects of routines that have not been
           compiled yet. On the other hand, modern programming environments typically
           provide a repository for compilation units, their relationships, and information
           about them. This facilitates interprocedural analysis by providing a way to save and
           access the relevant information (see Section 19.8).
                The distinctions between may and must information and flow-sensitive and
           flow-insensitive information discussed at the beginning of Chapter 10 and in Sec­
           tion 11.2 apply to interprocedural optimization also. In particular, the M O D () and
           REF( ) computations discussed in Section 19.2.1 are examples of flow-insensitive
       Section 19.1       Interprocedural Control-Flow Analysis: The Call Graph                         609

       problems and the D E F () and U S E () functions are examples of flow-sensitive prob­
       lems. Also, DEF( ) is must summary information, while USE( ) is may summary
       information.



19.1   Interprocedural Control-Flow A nalysis:
       The Call Graph
       The problem addressed by interprocedural control-flow analysis is construction of
       a program’s call graph.1 Given a program P consisting of procedures p i , . . . , p w,
       the (static) call graph of P is the graph Gp (or, usually, just G) = (N, S, E, r) with
       the node set N = { p i , . . . , p „}, the set S of call-site labels,12 the set E c N x N x S
       of labeled edges, and the distinguished entry node r e N (representing the main
       program), where for each e = (p/, s^,p 7), s*, denotes a call site in pz from which p;
       is called. If there is only one call from procedure pt to p;, we may omit the call site
       s& and write the edge as p,->py.
            As an example of a call graph, consider the program skeleton in Figure 19.1.
       Procedure f calls g and h, g calls h and i , and i calls g and j ; note that there are
       two calls from f to g. The call graph for this program is shown in Figure 19.2. The
       entry node is indicated by the heavy circle and the two calls from f to g by the two
       labels on the edge connecting them.
            Like depth-first order and its relatives in intraprocedural analysis, there are
       orders that are useful in several kinds of interprocedural problems, at least for nonre-
       cursive programs. One is known as invocation order and corresponds to processing
       a procedure before all its callees, i.e., breadth-first search of the call graph. Simi­
       larly, reverse invocation order processes a procedure after its callees. If our example
       in Figures 19.1 and 19.2 lacked the call from i to g, then f , g , h , i , j would be an
       invocation-order listing of its nodes. As our example shows, the procedures in a re­
       cursive program do not have such an order, unless we collapse strongly connected
       components to single nodes and are concerned with calls between them.
            Two other orders that are of use in interprocedural analysis refer to the static
       nesting of procedures. Outside-in order deals with each procedure before the ones
       statically (or lexically) enclosed within it. Inside-out order deals with each procedure
       after the ones statically enclosed within it. For our example, j , f , g , h , i is an inside-
       out order of the call graph.
            There are two issues that can make constructing call graphs difficult, namely,
       separate compilation and procedure-valued variables. Without them, constructing a
       program’s call graph is an easy exercise, as shown by the i c a n code for the procedure
       Build_Call_G raph( ) in Figure 19.3. In the algorithm, P is the set of procedures



       1. As we shall see, the call graph is actually a m u ltigrap h , with multiple directed edges from one
       node to another, or, alternatively, multiple labels on some edges. However, like most authors in this
       field, we refer to it as simply a graph.
       2. Note that in higher-level languages, line numbers are usually not sufficient to serve as call-site
       labels, since more than one call may be made from a single line of code.
610           Interprocedural Analysis and O ptim ization


              1      procedure f ( )
              2      begin
              3          c a ll g( )
              4          c a ll g( )
              5          c a ll h( )
              6      end       II f
              7      procedure g( )
              8      begin
              9          c a ll h( )
              10         c a ll i ( )
              11     end       II g
              12     procedure h( )
              13     begin
              14     end       II h
              15     procedure i ( )
              16         procedure j ( )
              17         begin
              18         end       II j
              19     begin
              20         c a ll g( )
              21         c a ll j ( )
              22     end       II i
  FIG. 19.1 A program skeleton.




  FIG. 19.2 Call graph for the program skeleton in Figure 19.1.

              that make up the program whose call graph is to be constructed, N is the set of nodes
              in the graph,3 r is the root procedure (often called main), and E is the set of labeled
              edges in the graph. The labels denote the call sites, i.e., < p ,/,g > e E if and only if
              call site i in procedure p calls q. The procedures used in the algorithm are as follows:

         1.   n u m in sts(p ) is the number of instructions in procedure p.
         2.   c a l l s e t (p ,z) returns the set of procedures called by the zth instruction in proce­
              dure p.


              3. Note that P = Nas long as every procedure in P is reachable from r.
            Section 19.1       Interprocedural Control-Flow Analysis: The Call Graph         611

            LabeledEdge = Procedure * integer * Procedure

            procedure Build_Call_Graph(P, r , N,E,numinsts)
               P: in set of Procedure
               r : in Procedure
               N: out set of Procedure
               E: out set of LabeledEdge
               numinsts: in Procedure —> integer
            begin
               i : integer
               p, q: Procedure
               OldN := 0: set of Procedure
               N := {r>
               E := 0
               while OldN * N do
                   p :« ♦(N - OldN)
                   OldN := N
                   for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                      for each q e c a lls e t( p ,i) do
                         N u= {q>
                         E u= { < p , i , q »
                      od
                   od
               od
            end        II Build_Call_Graph

FIG. 19.3 Constructing the call graph.



                 3,4       5
                                      ©
             0
                                      ©IT©
             ©
FIG. 19.4 Partial call graphs resulting from separate compilation of parts of Figure 19.1.

                Separate compilation can be bypassed as an issue by doing interprocedural
            analysis and optimization only when an entire program is presented to a compiler
            at once, or it can be handled by saving, during each compilation, a representation
            of the part of the call graph seen during that compilation and building the graph
            incrementally. In our example above, if f and g constituted one compilation unit
            and the other three procedures another, then we would have the two partial call
            graphs shown in Figure 19.4, and the interprocedural optimizer could “ glue” the
            two graphs together to make a complete static call graph.
612           In te rp ro ce d u ral A n aly sis an d O p tim iza tio n


              P, N, W: set of Procedure
              E: set of LabeledEdge
              PVVs: set of ProcVar
              PVCalls: set of LabeledEdge
              PVVals: ProcVar — > set of Procedure
              PVBinds: ProcVar — > set of ProcVar
              preturns: Procedure x integer x Var x Procedure x Var

              procedure Build_Call_Graph_with_PVVs(r,Inst,numinsts)
                 r: in Procedure
                 Inst: in Procedure — > array [••] of Instruction
                 numinsts: in Procedure — > integer
              begin
                 p, q, u, v: ProcVar u Procedure
                 i, j : integer
                 more, change: boolean
                 N := W := {r}
                 E := PVVs := PVCalls := PVVals := PVBinds := 0
                 I| repeat until the call graph stops expanding
                 repeat
                    more := false
                     I| accumulate procedure-valued variables and
                     I| constants, calls, values, and bindings
                    while W * 0 do
                        p :« *W; W — {p>
                        for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                           more V= Process.Inst(p,i,Inst)
                        od
                    od

  FIG. 19.5 Constructing the call graph with procedure-valued variables.


                    The call-graph construction algorithm is simple enough that we choose to pro­
              vide no example of its operation. The reader can easily construct one.
                    Procedure-valued variables present a more difficult problem. Weihl [Weih80]
              has shown that constructing the call graph of a recursive program with proce­
              dure variables is P SP A C E- hard, so this process can be very expensive in both
              time and space. One approach to doing so is to construct the call graph incre­
              mentally, as shown by the code in Figures 19.5, 19.6, and 19.7, which imple­
              ments three procedures B u ild _ C all_ G rap h _ w ith _ P V V s( ) , P r o c e s s . I n s t ( ), and
              P r o c e s s _ C a l l ( ), respectively. For now, ignore the outermost r e p e a t loop in
              B u ild _ C a ll_ G ra p h _ w ith _ P V V s( ). We begin by constructing as much of the graph
              as is evident from explicit calls. Then we determine initial sets of values for the pro­
              cedure variables and propagate them to all possible uses—i.e., to procedure-valued
              parameters, assignments, and returns—and from there to the call sites that use those
              procedure-valued variables. The procedure P r o c e s s . I n s t ( p 9i 9In st) handles each
              instruction in a procedure, while P r o c e s s _ C a l l ( / ? ,/ ,g ) deals with calls. The al­
              gorithm uses four data structures to record information about procedure-valued
              variables, as follows:
             Section 19.1     Interprocedural Control-Flow Analysis: The Call Graph                  613


                    I        I propagate bindings
             *     repeat
                       change := false
                       for each u e PVVs do
                          for each v e PVVs (v * u) do
                              if v e PVBinds(u)
                                 & PVBinds(u) * PVBinds(v) then
                                 PVBinds(u) u= PVBinds(v)
                                 change := true
                              fi
                          od
                       od
                   until !change
                    I| add nodes and edges to the call graph
                   for each <p,i,q> e PVCalls do
                       for each u e PVVals(q) do
                          N u= {u}
                          E u= {<p,i,q»
                          W u= {u}
                       od
                       for each u e PVBinds(q) do
                          for each v e PVVals(u) do
                              N u= {v}
                              E u= {<p,i,v>}
                             W u= {v}
                          od
                       od
                   od
                until Imore
             end     || Build_Call_Graph_with_PVVs

FIG. 19.5 (continued)


            proc_const, proc_var: Opereuid — > booleeui
            nparams: Procedure — > integer
            param: (Procedure x integer) — > Opereuid
            arg: (Procedure x integer x integer) — > Operand
            in.param, out_param: (Procedure x integer) — > Operand

            procedure Process_Inst(p,i,Inst) returns boolean
               p: in Procedure
               i : in integer
               Inst: in Procedure — > array [••] of Instruction
            begin
               q, u, v: ProcVar u Procedure
               j: integer
               more := false: booleeui
                                                                                            (continued)
FIG. 19.6 The procedure P r o c e s s . I n s t ( ) used in constructing the call graph with procedure­
          valued variables.
614            In te rp ro ce d u ral A n aly sis an d O p tim iza tio n


                   II accumulate calls
                  for each q e callset(p,i) do
                      more V= Process_Call(p,i,q)
                      if preturns(p,i,u,q,v) then
                          if proc_const(v) then
                             PVVs u= {u}
                             PVVals(u) u= {v}
                             if v £ N then
                                more := true
                             fi
                          else
                             PVVs u= {u,v}
                             PVBinds(u) u= {v}
                          fi
                      fi
                  od
                   if Inst(p)[i].kind = valasgn
                      & proc_var(Inst(p)[i].left) then
                      I| accumulate bindings
                      if proc_const(Inst(p)[i].opd.val) then
                          PVVs u= {Inst(p)[i].left}
                          PVVals(Inst(p)[i].left) u= {Inst(p) [i].opd.val}
                          if Inst(p)[i].opd.val £ N then
                             more := true
                          fi
                      else
                          PVVs u= {Inst(p)[i].left,Inst(p)[i].opd.val}
                          PVBinds(Inst(p)[i].left) u= {Inst(p)[i].opd.val}
                      fi
                   fi
                   return more
               end      II Process_Inst

  FIG , 19.6   (continued)


               procedure Process_Call(p,i,q) returns boolean
                  p: in Procedure
                  i : in integer
                  q: in ProcVar u Procedure
               begin
                  j : integer
                  more := false: boolean
                  if proc_const(q) then
                      II add nodes and edges to the call graph
                      N u= {q}
                      E u= {<p,i,q>}
                      W u= {q}

  FIG . 19.7   The procedure P r o c e s s _ C a ll( ) used in constructing the call graph with procedure­
               valued variables.
            Section 19.1   Interprocedural Control-Flow Analysis: The Call Graph        615

                  II deal with passing procedure-valued objects as parameters
                  for j := 1 to nparams(q) do
                      if proc_var(param(q,j)) & in_param(q,j) then
                         if proc_const(arg(p,i,j)) then
                            PVVs u= {param(q,j)}
                            PVVals(param(q,j)) u= {arg(p,i,j)>
                            if arg(p,i,j) ^ N then
                               more := true
                            fi
                         else
                            PVVs u= {param(q,j),arg(p,i,j)}
                            PVBinds(param(q,j)) u= {arg(p,i,j)}
                         fi
                      fi
                      I| and return of procedure-valued objects
                      if proc.var(param(q,j)) & out_param(q,j) then
                         if proc.const(arg(p,i,j)) then
                            PVVs u= {arg(p,i,j)}
                            PVVals(arg(p,i,j)) u= {param(q,j)>
                            if param(q,j) t N then
                               more := true
                            fi
                         else
                            PVVs u= {param(q,j),arg(p,i,j)}
                            PVBinds(arg(p,i,j)) u= {param(q,j)>
                         fi
                      fi
                  od
               else
                  PVVs u= {q>
                  PVCalls u= {<p,i,q»
               fi
               return more
            end     II Process_Call

FIG. 19.7 (continuedj



       1.   PVVs records all the procedure-valued variables.
       2.   PVCalls records call sites that invoke procedure-valued variables.
       3.   PVVals records the procedure constants that are assigned, bound, or returned to
            procedure-valued variables.
       4.   PVBinds records the procedure-valued variables that are assigned, bound, or re­
            turned to procedure-valued variables.

            There are nine types of actions in a program that concern procedure-valued vari­
            ables. They and the initial actions we take for them are as follows:
616        Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


      1.   Call to a procedure-valued variable vp at site s in procedure p : put the triple <p,s,i/p>
           into PVCalls.
      2.   Bind a procedure constant p as an actual argument to a procedure-valued formal
           parameter vp: put the <i/p,p> pair into the finite function PVVals and put vp into
           PVVs.
      3.   Bind a procedure-valued variable vp as an actual argument to a procedure-valued
           formal parameter fp: put a <i/p/p> pair into the finite function PVBinds and put
           both procedure variables into PVVs.
      4.   Assign one procedure-valued variable vpl to another vpl: put the <i/pl,i/p2> pair
           into PVBinds and put both procedure variables into PVVs.
      5.   Assign a procedure constant p to a procedure-valued variable vp: put the <i/p,p> pair
           into PVVals and put vp into PVVs.
      6.   Bind a procedure-valued variable vp to a procedure-valued output parameter fp of a
           call: put the <v p jp > pair into PVBinds and put both procedure variables into PVVs.
      7.   Bind a procedure constant p to a procedure-valued output parameter fp of a call:
           put the </p,p> pair into PVVals and put fp into PVVs.
      8.   Return a procedure-valued variable vpl to a procedure-valued variable vpl: put the
           (vpl^vpiy pair into PVBinds and put both procedure variables into PVVs.
      9.   Return a procedure constant p to a procedure-valued variable vp: put the <i/p,p>
           pair into PVVals and put vp into PVVs.


               After these initial actions, we construct from PVCalls, PVVals, and PVBinds,
           for each procedure-valued variable, the set of procedure-valued variables that
           can be bound, assigned, or returned to it; then we construct a call-graph edge
           for each call site from which a procedure-valued variable is called and for each
           procedure constant that may be bound as its value. The outermost loop in
           Build_Call_Graph_with_PVVs( ) takes care of the possibility that one or more
           parts of the program are reachable only by means of calls through procedure-valued
           variables.
               The procedures used in the algorithm are as follows:1


      1.   num insts(p) is the number of instructions in p.
      2.   In st(p ) [1 • •n u m in sts(p)] is the array of instructions that make up procedure p.
      3.   c a l l s e t (p,z) returns the set of procedures called by the zth instruction in proce­
           dure p.
      4.   p ro c .c o n st(p ) returns tru e if p is a procedure constant, and f a l s e otherwise.
      5.   p roc_v ar(p ) returns tru e if p is a procedure-valued variable, and f a l s e otherwise.
      6.   nparams (p) returns the number of formal parameters of procedure p.
            Section 19.1     Interprocedural Control-Flow Analysis: The Call Graph                   617

                    procedure f( )
            f       begin
                1       call g( )
                    end
                    procedure g( )
                    begin
            g           p: Procedure
             1          p := h
             2          call p( )
             3          call j(i)
                    end
                    procedure h( )
            h       begin
                1       call i( )
                    end
                    procedure i( )
            i       begin
             1          call g( )
                    end
                    procedure j(a)
                        a: Procedure
            j       begin
                1       call a( )
                    end

FIG. 19.8 An example program skeleton with procedure-valued variables.


       7.   a r g (p , i ,/) returns the /th actual argument of the procedure called by the ith instruc­
            tion in p .
       8.   param ( p ,/) returns the ; th formal parameter of procedure p.
       9.   in .p a ra m (p ,i) returns tr u e if the zth parameter of p receives a value from its caller,
            and f a l s e otherwise.
      10.   out_param (p,z) returns tru e if the zth parameter of p returns a value to its caller,
            and f a l s e otherwise.
      11.   p r e t u r n s ( p ,i,u ,q ,v ) returns tru e if the zth instruction in p calls procedure g,
            which returns its value in variable z/, which in turn is assigned to p ’s variable u.

                  This propagation process yields a conservative approximation of the call graph,
            but it may require exponential time for recursive program s, so it needs to be applied
            with care. Note that what we have produced is flow-insensitive may call information;
            it is possible to make it flow sensitive, but that incurs another increase in com puta­
            tional cost. Note also that there is still a practical case we have not handled, namely,
            call-backs from library routines to procedures in the program.
                  As an example of constructing the call graph for a program with procedure­
            valued variables, consider the program skeleton shown in Figure 19.8. Assuming
            that f ( ) is the main procedure, initially we have N = W= { f >; and E, PVVs, PV C alls,
618           Interprocedural Analysis and O ptim ization

              PVVals, and PVBinds are all empty. The for loop immediately inside the out­
              ermost (repeat) loop in Build_Call_Graph_with_PVVs(f,Inst,numinsts) sets
              p = f,W= 0, and i = 1 and calls Process.Inst (f,1, Inst).Process_Inst ( ) calls
              Process_Call (f,1, g),which sets N = {f,g}, E = {<f,1,g>}, and W = {g}, and re­
              turns false. Then Process.Inst( ) returns false.
                   Next, the for loop sets p to g, W to 0 and i to 1 and proceeds to call
              Process_Inst(g,l,Inst), which determines that Inst(g) [1] is p := h and that
              h is a procedure constant, and so sets PVVs = {p} and PVVals(p) = {h}, and returns
              true. So the variable more in Build_Call_Graph_with_PVVs( ) is set to true.
                   Next, i is set to 2 and Process.Inst(g,2,Inst) is called. It calls
              Process_Call(g,2,p), which sets PVVs = {p} and PVCalls = {<g,2,p», and re­
              turns false.
                   Next, i is set to 3 and Process_Inst(g,3,Inst) is called, which, in turn,
              calls Process_Call(g,2,j), resulting in N = {f,g,j}, E = {<f,l,g>, <g,3,j»,
              W = {j}, and PVVals(a) = {i}, and which returns true.
                   Next, p is set to j, W to 0, and i to 1, and we call Process_Inst(j ,l,Inst),
              which in turn calls Process_Call(j ,1 ,a). Process_Call( ) sets PVVs = {p,a}and
              PVCalls = {<g,2,p>,<j ,l,a>}, and returns false.
                   N ow W is empty, so the main routine enters the inner r e p e a t loop marked with
              an asterisk in Figure 19.5. The condition within the nested f o r loops is not satisfied,
              so the main routine enters the following f o r loop, which sets N = { f , g , j , h , i > ,
              E = {<f,1 ,g > , < g , 3 , j > , < g ,2 ,h > , <j , l , i » , and W = { h ,i> .
                   Since more = tr u e , the main loop is repeated, this time leaving N as is, set­
              ting E = {<f,1 , g > , < g , 3 , j > , < g ,2 ,h > , <j ,1,i > , <h, 1,i > , < i , l , g » , and set­
              ting W= 0. N o further changes occur to the data structures, and the final call graph
              is as shown in Figure 19.9.
                   O f course, programs that create new code at run time make it impossible to
              construct a complete static call graph.




  FIG. 19.9   Call graph of the program skeleton with procedure-valued variables shown in
              Figure 19.8.
             Section 19.2    Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                  619

19.2         Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis
             The issue addressed by interprocedural data-flow analysis is determining a useful but
             conservative approximation of how a program manipulates data at the level of its
             call graph. The most useful such information generally consists of knowing (1) what
             variables may be modified as side effects of a procedure call and (2) what parameters
             of a called procedure have constant values when it is called from a particular call
             site. Knowing the range of possible side effects of a call allows us to freely optimize
             the code around the call, as long as we avoid variables that may be affected by the
             called procedure. Knowing that one or more parameters have particular constant
             values in a given call allows us to determine whether it may be useful to clone a
             copy of the procedure’s body for that call site and then to optimize it based on the
             constant parameter values. Such information may also be useful in driving procedure
             integration decisions (see Section 15.2).
                  Of course, aliasing complicates interprocedural analysis as it does intraproce­
             dural problems. We deal with alias computation and integrating its results with
             alias-free interprocedural data-flow analysis in Section 19.4.

19.2.1       Flow-Insensitive Side-Effect Analysis
             As suggested above, the goal of interprocedural side-effect analysis is to determine,
             for each call site, a safe approximation of the side effects that the procedure invoked
             at that call site may have. We include in that approximation any side effects of
             procedures called from that site, and so on.
                  We characterize side effects by four functions from instructions to sets of vari­
             ables. Instructions, including call sites, are represented by (procedure name,instruc­
             tion number) pairs. The functions are

                 DEE, MOD, REE, USE : Procedure x in te g e r —> s e t of Var

             as follows:
         DEE(p, i) - the set of variables that must be defined (i.e., that are definitely assigned
            values) by executing the zth instruction in procedure p.
         M O D (p, i) = the set of variables that may be modified (i.e., that may be assigned values)
             by executing the zth instruction in procedure p .
         REE(p, i) = the set of variables that may be referenced (i.e., that may have their values
            fetched) by executing the zth instruction in procedure p.
                , i) = the set of variables that may be referenced (i.e., that may be fetched) by the
                instruction in procedure p before being defined by it.


             These functions are easy to compute for individual instructions that do not involve
             calls, as long as we disregard aliasing, discussion of which we postpone until Sec­
             tion 19.4. To represent these sets with aliasing disregarded, we prefix a D to the
             sets’ names, e.g., alias-free MOD is DMOD. For example, D D EE(p, i) for an as­
             signment instruction v <- exp is {i/} and for a predicate pred it is 0, assuming that
620         Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


            the expression and predicate include no calls. Similarly, D R E F(p, i) for the assign­
            ment instruction is the set of variables that occur in exp and, for the predicate, the
            set of variables that occur in pred.
                 As an example, we concentrate on computing D M O D , using an approach based
            on the work of Cooper and Kennedy (see Section 19.10 for references).
                 Throughout this section, we use the program in Figure 19.10 as an example.
            Its static nesting structure and call graph are shown in Figure 19.11. Note that
            there are three distinct j s in the program—the global variable in main( ), the local
            variable in n( ), and the formal parameter of m( ), which we denote by j l9 j 2, and
            j 3, respectively, in what follows. To allow totally general naming of variables and
            parameters, we would need to identify the sequence of procedures each variable is
            nested in, e.g., we might denote the global j by <j , [main] >, the local j in g ( ) by
            <j , [main,g] >, and the parameter j of m( ) by <j , [main,g,n,m] >.
                  First we define the following:

       1.   LM O D (p, i) is the set of variables that may be modified locally by executing the /th
            instruction in procedure p (excluding the effects of procedure calls that appear in
            that instruction).
       2.   IM OD(p) is the set of variables that may be modified by executing procedure p
            without executing any calls within it.
       3.   IM OD + (p) is the set of variables that may be either directly modified by procedure
            p or passed by reference to another procedure and that may be modified as a side
            effect of it.
       4.   GM OD(p) is the set of all variables that may be modified by an invocation of
            procedure p.
       5.   RM OD(p) is the set of formal parameters of p that may be modified as side effects
            of invoking procedure p.
       6.   Nonlocals(p) is the set of variables that are visible in procedure p but that are not
            local to it.
       7.   Formals(p) is the set of formal parameters of procedure p.
       8.   numinsts(p) is the number of instructions in procedure p.
       9.   callsites(p) is the set of integers i such that the zth instruction in procedure p calls
            some procedure.
      10.   callset(p , i) is the set of procedures called from the zth instruction in procedure p . 4
      11.   nested(p) is the set of procedures statically nested in procedure p.



            4. Note that in our intermediate languages hir , mir , and lir , an instruction may call at most one
            procedure. However, we allow for multiple calls per instruction to illustrate how to encompass that
            situation.
             Section 19.2     Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                621

                      procedure main( )
                          global i , j , e
                          procedure f(x )
             f            begin
                 1            i := 2
                 2            j := g ( i,x )
                 3            i f x = 0 then
                 4                   j    x + 1
                 5            fi
                 6            return j
                          end     I| f
                          procedure g(a,b )
                              lo c a l j
                              procedure n (k ,l)
                                    procedure m(w,y,j)
             m                      begin
                 1                       j := n(w ,i)
                 2                       return y + j
                                    end      |I m
             n                begin
                 1                  k := j + 1
                 2                      II    1   CN

                 3                      return k + m (i,i,k )
                                end         |I n
             g            begin
                 1              i f a > 1 then
                 2                      a := b + 2
                 3              e lse
                 4                     b := h(a,b)
                 5              fi
                 6              return a + b + n(b,b)
                          end       |I g
                          procedure h(c,d)
             h            begin
                 1                e := e /g ( l,d )
                 2                return e
                          end         II h
             main     begin
                 1        c a ll f ( i )
                      end      || main
FIG. 19.10 An example program used throughout this section.

       12.   bpj^{ ) is the function that maps formal parameters in procedure q to their cor­
             responding formal parameters at instruction i in procedure p, which is assumed to
             include a call to q . Variables global to both p and q are passed through from p to q
             also.
       13.   Inst( ) is the function that, for a procedure p, yields the array o f instructions that
             make up p in order, namely, Inst(p)[ 1 • • numinsts(p)).
622           In te rp ro c e d u ra l A n a ly sis an d O p tim iz a tio n


              main
                                                                                    main
                                                                                              o
                                     n                                                    f
                                                                                              o
                                                  m




                                                                                                    m
              (a)                                                                  (b)
 FIG. 19.11   (a) Static nesting structure and (b) call graph of the program in Figure 19.10.



                   N o w D M O D (p,         i)
                                       can be com puted as the union o f             ,            LMOD(p i)
                                                                                         (which can
              be com puted easily for any instruction) with a union o f generalized m odification
              sets   GMOD(   ), for procedures              q                                     i
                                                  called from instruction in procedure p , filtered
              through a bp^q{ )                                                    q
                                  function that m aps form ats o f to the correspon din g form ats o f
              p, that is


                    DMOD(p, i) = LMOD(p, i) U                         |J      bp^q(GMOD(q))
                                                                 qecallset(pyi)


                GMOD(p) can be com puted as the union o f IMOD+(p) with the union o f
              GMOD ( ) values (restricted to nonlocal variables) for all the call sites in p, i.e.,
                                                                                              GMOD(q) D Nonlocals(q)
                                                             1<i<numinsts(p) qecallset(pj)


                    IMOD^(p)   is the union o f            IMOD(p)
                                                        with the union o f all the            values    RMOD(q)
                                         q
              for all procedures called from p, filtered through a                        bp^q{ )
                                                                            function, as follow s:


                    IMOD+(p) = IMOD(p) U                         [J           (J          bp^q(RMOD(q))
                                                           iecallsites(p) qecallset(pj)
            Section 19.2       Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                   623

            IMOD: Procedure — > set of Var

            procedure Compute.IMOD(p,P)
               p : in Procedure
               P: in se t of Procedure
            begin
               V := 0: se t of Var
               i : integer
               q: Procedure
               I I apply data-flow equations to compute IMOD
               for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                   V u= LM0D(p,i)
               od
                  IMOD(p) := V
            end        || Compute.IMOD

FIG. 19.12 ican algorithm to compute IM OD( ) for a program P.


                  Finally, IM O D (p), i.e.,

                  IM O D (p) =           |J              L M O D (p , i)
                                 1 <i<n u m in sts{p )


                  Note that IM O D can be computed easily, so computing D M O D efficiently
            reduces to computing RM O D and G M O D efficiently.
                  To compute R M O D , we use a data structure called the binding graph. While
            this could be done by standard interprocedural data-flow analysis, the approach
            described here is more efficient. The binding graph B = (N b ,E b )5 for a program
            P has nodes in N b that represent the formal parameters in P and edges in E b that
            represent bindings of a caller’s formal parameters to a callee’s parameters. If at some
            call site in p there is a call of q that binds formal parameter x of p to formal
            parameter y of q, then there is an edge x^>y in E b— or transitively, through some
            number of calls, x is bound to a formal parameter z of some procedure r, then there
            is also an edge x -> z in E b . Note that only uses of a procedure’s formal parameters
            as actual arguments to a called procedure generate edges in E b .
                  The ican routine Compute_IMOD( ) in Figure 19.12. For our example program,
            the values of Nonlocals and IM O D are as shown in Table 19.1.
                  The ican routine B uild_B indin g_G raph( ) in Figure 19.13 constructs the bind­
            ing graph for a program P. The value of nparam s(p) is the number of formal
            parameters of p, and param (p,z) is the zth formal parameter of p . The value of
            p a s s e d ( p , i 9q , x 9y) is tru e if instruction i in procedure p calls procedure q and
            binds p ’s formal parameter x to q's formal parameter y, and f a l s e otherwise.
                  To build the binding graph for the program in Figure 19.10, we initially set
            P = {m a in ,f ,g ,h ,n ,m }, N = 0, E = 0, and oldE = 0. Assuming that we process pro-


            5. This is a Gfeek uppercase beta, not the Roman letter B.
624           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


TABLE 19.1 Values of Nonlocals( ) and IMOD( ) for the program in Figure 19.10.

              Nonlocals( main)       =0                          /MOD(main)    = 0
              Nonlocals(f)           = {©»i »ji>                 IMOD(f)       = f i.jl)
              Nonlocals(g)           = le »i. Ji)                IMOD(g)       = {a,b}
              Nonlocals(n)           = { a ,b ,e ,i ,j2}         IMOD(n)       = {k,l}
              Nonlocals( m)          = {a ,b ,e ,i,k ,l}         IMOD(m)       = {J3I
              Nonlocals( h)          = ( e .i.ji)                IMOD(h)       = {e)



              cedure main( ) first, we encounter a call in line 1, so we have p = main, i = 1, and
              q = f , and we call Bind_Pairs(m ain, 1 , f ), which leaves N and E unchanged. We
              encounter no other calls in main( ), so we process f ( ) next, which adds x and b to
              N and the edge x->b to E, resulting in

                  N = {x ,b >         E = {x-> b }

              Next, we process g( ), which adds a, c, d, k, and 1 to N and adds several edges to E,
              as follows:

                  N = { x ,b , a , c , d , k , l >   E = {x-> b , a-> c, b->d, b->k, b - > l}

              Processing h( ) leaves N unchanged, but augments E again, as follows:

                  N = {x ,b ,a ,c ,d ,k ,l}
                  E = {x —>b, a —  >c, b->d, b—>k, b—>1, d—>b}

              The process continues until finally the last top-level loop in Build_Binding_Graph( )
              adds the transitive edges to E, resulting in

                  N = { x , b , a , c , d , k , l , w , x , j 3}
                  E = {x —  >b, a —>c, b—>d, b—                >k, b—
                                                                    >1, d—
                                                                         >b, d—
                                                                              >k, d—>1, k—> j3,
                        d - > j3, b - » j3, w-»k, w->j3, x->d, x->k, x - > j3, x - > l}

              and the graphic representation in Figure 19.14. Note that, as for this example, the
              binding graph is generally not connected and contains cycles only if the program is
              recursive.
                   Next, we define RMOD on a program’s binding graph. The function RBMOD
              from nodes in N b to Boolean values is such that RBMOD (x) is tru e if x is modified
              as a side effect of calling some procedure, and f a l s e otherwise. Computing RBMOD
              can then be done by solving the data-flow equations

                  RBMOD(x) = Bp e P (x e Formals(p) n IMOD(p)) v                  \J         RBMOD(y)
                                                                               x —> ye E %


              on the binding graph, with RBMOD(x) initialized to f a l s e for all x. The algorithm
              Compute_RBM0D (P , N , E ) , where P is the set of procedures in the call graph, and N
            Section 19.2    Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis           625


            procedure Build_Binding_Graph(P,N ,E)
               P: in set of Procedure
               N: out set of Var
               E: out set of (Var x Var)
            begin
               p, q: Procedure
                i, m, n: integer
               e, f: Var x Var
               oldE: set of (Var x Var)
                I| construct graph that models passing parameters
                I| as parameters to other routines
               N := E := oldE := 0
               repeat
                   oldE := E
                   for each p e P do
                       for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                          for each q e callset(p,i) do
                             Bind_Pairs(p,i,q ,N ,E)
                          od
                       od
                   od
               until E = oldE
               repeat
                   oldE := E
                   for each e e E do
                       for each f e E (f * e) do
                          if e@2 = f@l & e@l * f@2 then
                             E u= {e@l->f@2}
                          fi
                       od
                   od
               until E = oldE
            end      || Build_Binding_Graph

            procedure Bind_Pairs(p,i,q,N,E)
               p, q: in Procedure
                i: in integer
               N: inout set of Var
               E: inout set of (Var x Var)
            begin
               m, n: integer
               for m := 1 to nparams(p) do
                   for n := 1 to nparams(q) do
                      if passed(p,i,q,param(p,m),param(q,n)) then
                         N u= {param(p,m),param(q,n)}
                         E u= {param(p,m)->param(q,n)}
                      fi
                   od
               od
            end     || Bind_Pairs

FIG. 19.13 Algorithm to construct the binding graph B for a program P.
626           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization




 FIG. 19.14 Binding graph for the program in Figure 19.10.


              RBMOD: Var — > boolean

             procedure Compute_RBMOD(P,N,E)
                P: in set of Procedure
                N: in set of Var
                E: in set of (Var x Var)
             begin
                p: Procedure
                n: Var
                e: Var x Var
                oldRBMOD: Var —> boolean
                RBMOD := 0
                repeat
                    oldRBMOD := RBMOD
                    for each n e N do
                         RBMOD(n) := 3p e p (n e Formals(p) n IMOD(p))
                         for each e e E (e@l = n) do
                             RBMOD(n) V= RBMOD(e02)
                         od
                    od
                u ntil RBMOD = oldRBMOD
             end      I I Compute_RBM0D
 FIG. 19.15 Algorithm to compute RBM O D () on the binding graph B.


             and E are the sets of nodes and edges, respectively, of the binding graph, is shown in
             Figure 19.15. The outermost loop should be executed in postorder, i.e., as much as
             possible, each node should be processed after its successors in the binding graph.
                 Now, RM O D(p) for a procedure p is simply the set of formal parameters x of p
             such that RBMOD(x) is tru e , i.e.,

                  RM OD(p) = {x | x € Formals(p) & RBM O D (x)}

                  As an example of computing RBM OD, we compute it for our example program
             in Figure 19.10, whose binding graph is in Figure 19.14. To compute RM OD, we
             call Compute_RBMOD(P,N,E) with
               Section 19.2        Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                                      627

TABLE 19.2 Initial values of RBMOD()
           obtained by evaluating
           the existentially quantified
           expression in the equations
           for R B M O D ( ) for the nodes
           in the binding graph for our
           example in Figure 19.10.

               RBMOD(x) = false
               RBMOD( b) = true
               RBMOD( a) = true
               RBMOD(c) = false
               RBMOD( d) = false
               RBMOD( k) = true
               RBMOD( 1) = false
               RBMOD( w) = false
               RBMOD( y) = true
               RBMOD( j 3) = true

TABLE 19.3 Final values of R B M O D ( ) for the nodes in the binding graph
           for our example in Figure 19.10.

              RBMOD(x) = fa lse v RBMOD(b) v RBMOD(j 3) = true
              RBMOD( b) = true
              RBMOD( a) = true
              RBMOD(c) = fa lse
              RBMOD(d) = false v RBMOD(b) = true
              RBMOD( k) = true
              RBMOD(l) = false
              RBMOD(w) = fa lse v RBMOD(j 3) = true
              RBMOD( y) = true
              RBMOD( j 3) = true

                   P = {m a in ,f,g ,h ,n ,m >
                   N = {x ,b ,a ,c ,d ,k ,l,w ,z ,j>
                   E = {x -> b ,    a -> c ,   b -> d ,   b -> k ,   b -> l,   d -> b ,   d -> k ,   d -> l,   k -> j3 ,
                                     b - > j 3 , w -> k ,   w -> j3 , x -> d ,     x -> k ,   x -> j3, x -> l}

                   The algorithm initializes RBMOD( ) for each node in the binding graph as
              shown in Table 19.2 and then iterates, computing RBMOD( ) for the nodes until
              it converges,6 resulting in the values shown in Table 19.3.


              6. Note that the data-flow equations for RBMOD are defined on the two-element lattice with
              f a ls e c true.
628           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


TABLE 19.4 Values of RM O D () for our
           example in Figure 19.10.

              RMOD (main) = 0
              RMOD( f)   = {x}
              RMOD(g)     ={a,b}
              RMOD( n)   = {k}
              RMOD( m)   = {w,y,j3}
              RMOD( h)   = {d}



              IMODPLUS: Procedure — > set of Var

              procedure Compute_IMODPLUS(P)
                  P: in set of Procedure
              begin
                  p, q: Procedure
                  i: integer
                  IMODPLUS := 0
                  for each p e p do
                     IMODPLUS(p) := IMOD(p)
                      for each i e callsites(p) do
                          for each q e callset(p,i) do
                             IMODPLUS(p) U— b(p,i,q,RM0D(q))
                          od
                      od
                  od
              end    II Compute_IMODPLUS
 FIG. 19.16   ican algorithm to compute 7 M O D +().




                  Thus, RM O D ( ) is as shown in Table 19.4.
                  Recall that IM O D + is defined as

                  IM OD + (p) — IM O D(p) U             (J          bp^ q(RMOD{q))
                                                   qecallset(p j)

              so it can be computed easily as shown in Figure 19.16 (note that we use b ( p , i , q , r )
              to represent bp^q(r) in the algorithm) and its values for our example are as shown
              in Table 19.5.
                     To compute GM OD from /M O D + efficiently, we use the algorithms given in
              Figures 19.17 and 19.18, which operate on the call graph (i.e., Edges is the set of
              edges in the call graph, not the binding graph).
                     Given a call graph with procedures P, edges Edges, and main routine r, the
              i c a n routines S t r a t i f y ( ) and S et .L e v e ls ( ) in Figure 19.17 constructs the func­

              tion Level ( ) that maps procedures to their nesting levels. For each nesting level
               Section 19.2      Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                     629

TABLE 19.5 Values of IM OD+ ( ) for our example in Figure 19.10.

               IM OD+ (main) = /MOD(main) J ^;main,l,f(K M O D (f ))
                               = {i,j1)U{i) = {i,ji)
               IM OD+ ( f)     = IM O D (i) U bf >2>g(RMOD(g)) = { i, j x} U {i,x }


               IM OD+ (g)      = IM OD(g) U bg>4th(RMOD(h)) U fcg,6ln(RMOD(n))
                               = {a,b}U{b}U{b} = {a,b}
               IMOD+ (a)       = IMOD(n) U £>n,3 ,m(RMOD(m)) = {k.y}
               IM OD+ (m)      = IMOD(m) U bm>1>n(RMOD(n)) = {j3}U {w)
                               = {J3>W)
               IM OD+ (h)      = lMOD(h) U bh < ltg (RM OD( g)) = {e} U {d} = {e,d}



               N, R: array [••] of set of Procedure
               E: array [••] of set of (Procedure x Procedure)
               Level := 0: Procedure — > integer
               depth, NextDfn: integer
               Dfn: Procedure —> integer
               LowLink: Procedure — > integer
               GMOD, IMODPLUS, Nonlocals: Procedure —> set of Var
               Stack: sequence of Procedure

               procedure Stratify(P,Edges,r) returns integer
                  P: in set of Procedure
                  Edges: in set of (Procedure x Procedure)
                  r: in Procedure
               begin
                  i, j, depth: integer
                  p, q: Procedure
                  WL := P: set of Procedure
                  Level(r) := 0
                  Set_Levels(r)
                  depth := 0
                  for i := 0 to depth do
                     N[i] := 0
                     for j :s 0 to i-1 do
                        WL u= {p e P where Level(p) = j}
                     od
                     for j := i to depth do
                        for each p e p (Level(p) = j) do                                                     ,
                                                                                               (continued)
 FIG. 19.17 Algorithm to compute nesting levels Level ( ) in a call graph and the subgraphs
            (consisting of nodes N[ ], roots R[ ] , and edges E[ ]) that exclude routines that call
            others at lower nesting levels. S t r a t i f y ( ) uses S et_ L ev els to compute the nesting
            level of each procedure.
630           Interprocedural Analysis and O ptim ization


                            if called(p) n WL = 0 then
                               N [i] u= {p}
                            fi
                        od
                        WL u= {p e p where Level(p) = j}
                    od
                    E [i] := Edges n (N[i] x N[i])
                    R[i] := {p e N[i] where Level (p) = i}
                 od
                 return depth
              end    I| Stratify

              procedure Set_Levels(r)
                 r : in Procedure
              begin
                 p: Procedure
                 for each p e nested(r) do
                     Level(p) := Level(r) + 1
                     if Level(p) > depth then
                        depth := Level(p)
                     fi
                     Set_Levels(p)
                 od
              end     II Set_Levels

 FIG. 19.17   (continued)


              procedure Compute_GMOD( )
              begin
                  i: integer
                 n, r: Procedure
                 for i := depth by -1 to 0 do
                     for each r e R[i] do
                        NextDfn := 0
                        for each n e N[i] do
                           Dfn(n) := 0
                        od
                        Stack := []
                        GMOD_Search(i,r)
                     od
                 od
              end     |I Compute_GM0D

 FIG. 19.18   Algorithm for computing GMOD( ) efficiently from IM OD+ ( ) by using a version of
              Tarjan’s algorithm.
             Section 19.2      Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                          631


             procedure GMOD_Search(i,p)
                 i: in integer
                p : in Procedure
             begin
                j: integer
                u : Procedure
                e: Procedure x Procedure
                LowLink(p) := Dfn(p) := NextDfn += 1
                GMOD(p) := IMODPLUS(p)
                Stack ®= [p]
                for each e e E[i] (e@l = p) do
                    if Dfn[e@2] = 0 then
                       GM0D_Search(i,e@2)
                       LowLink(p) := min(LowLink(p),LowLink(e@2))
                    fi
                    if Dfn(e@2) < Dfn(p) & 3j e integer (Stacksj=e@2) then
                       LowLink(p) := min(Dfn(e@2),LowLink(p))
                    else
                       GMOD(p) u= GM0D(e@2) n Nonlocals(e@2)
                    fi
                od
             * if LowLink(p) = Dfn(p) then
                    repeat
                       u := Stackl-1
                       Stack ©= -1
                       GMOD(u) u= GMOD(p) n Nonlocals(p)
                    until u = p
                fi
             end     || GMOD.Search

FIG. 19.18   (continued)


             0 ^ i ^ depth of the program , S t r a t i f y ( ) also computes the subgraph with nodes
             N[ i ] , roots R [ i] ,7 and edges E [ i] such that a routine is in N [ i] if all the routines it
             calls have nesting levels greater than or equal to i . The routine c a lle d ( p ) returns
             the set of procedures called from procedure p.
                   Applying S t r a t i f y ( ) to our example program results in depth = 3 and the
             data structures in Table 19.6.
                   The G M O D computation is an adaptation of Tarjan’s algorithm to compute
             strongly connected components (see Section 7.4). The underlying idea is that, for
             a strongly connected component— i.e., a set o f mutually recursive procedures—
             GM O D for its root node represents all the side effects that may occur in nodes (i.e.,
             procedures) in the component, so G M O D for each node in it is the union of IM O D +
             for the node with G M O D for the root node intersected with the set of nonlocal


             7. Note that a subgraph may have multiple roots if,for example, the main routine (at level 0) calls
             two routines (at level 1).
632           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


TABLE 19*6 Values of Level( ), N[ ], R[ ], and E[ ] for our example
           program in Figure 19.10.

              Level(main) = 0
              Level(f) * Level(g) = Level(h) = 1
              Level(n) - 2
              Level(m) - 3

              N [0] * {main,f,g,h,n,m>           R[0] = {main}
              N [1] = {f,g,h,n,m>                R[l] = {f>
              N [2] = {n,m}                      R[2] = {n}
              N[3] = {m>                         R[3] = {m}

              E[0] = {main-^f, f->g, g-^h, g-^n, h->g, n-^m, m->n}
              E [1] = {f->g, g-*h, g->n, h-^g, n->m, m->n}
              E[2] = {n->m, m->n}
              E [3] = 0



TABLE 19.7 Initial values for GMOD( ) for our
           example program.

              GMOD(main)      IMOD+ (main)= {i , j j )
              GMOD( f)        IMOD+(f ) = { i , j i ,x}
              GMOD(g)         7MOD+ (g)={a,b )
              GMOD(n)         /M O D + (n)={k,y)
              GMOD( m)        7MOD+ (m)={ j 3 ,w)
              GMOD( h)        7MOD+ (h)={d,e)



              variables that occur in the procedure. The central point of the algorithm is that the
              test marked with an asterisk in Figure 19.18 evaluates to tru e if and only if p is the
              root of a strongly connected component of the call graph.
                   As an example of the computation of G M O D , we apply the algorithm to the
              program in Figure 19.10. We invoke Compute_GMOD(main), which performs the
              depth-first search and identification of strongly connected components and, in effect,
              initializes GM OD to the values shown in Table 19.7. Then it accumulates, in order,
              the values shown in Table 19.8.
                   Now, finally, we apply the defining equation for D M O D , to get the values shown
              in Table 19.9.
                   The computational complexity of this approach to computing flow-insensitive
              side effects is 0 (e n + d w2), where n and e are the numbers of nodes and edges,
              respectively, in the call graph and d is the depth of lexical nesting in the program.
              The factor of d may be removed by combining the iterations in Compute_GM0D( )
              into a single pass over the call graph (see Exercise 19.2 in Section 19.11).
                   Similar decompositions can be used to compute the other flow-insensitive may
              summary functions.
             Section 19.2    Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis      633

TABLE 19.8 Final values for GM OD() for our example program.

             GMOD( m)       = { w>
             GMOD(n)        = {k,y!
             GMOD(h)        = (d,e)
             GMOD( g)       = {a,b} U (GMOD(h) n Nonlocals(h))
                            = {a,b} U {e}={a,b,e}
              GMOD(f)       = {i,jj ,x) U (GMOD(g) n Nonlocals(g))
                        = U.ji.x) u {e}={e,i,ji,x)
             GMOD(main) = {i, j!} U (GMOD(f) n Nonlocals(f))
                        = {i.ji)U{e}={e,i,j i}



TABLE 19.9 Values of D M O D () for our example program.

             DMOD (main, 1) = LMOD (main, 1) = 0
             DMOD( f, 1)    = LMOD(f, l) = {i)
             DMOD(f, 2)     = LMOD(i, 2) U bf j2)g(GMOD(g))
                            = (ji) U (e,i,x) = {e,i,ji ,x}
             DMOD(f, 3)     = LMOD(i, 3) = 0
             DMOD( f,4)     = LMOD(f,4) = {j1}
             DMOD(f, 5)     = LMOD(f, 5) = 0
             DMOD(f, 6)     = LMOD(f, 6) = 0
             DMOD( g, 1)    = LMOD( g, 1) = 0
             DMOD(g, 2)     = LMOD(g, 2) = {a}
             DMOD(g, 3)     = LMOD(g, 3) = 0
             DMOD(g, 4)     = LMOD{g,4) U bg^jjCGMODOi))
                            = (b) U {b,e} = {b,e}
             DMOD(g, 5)     = LMOD(g, 5) = {a)
             DMOD(g, 6)     = LMOD{g, 6) = {a}
             DMOD(h, 1)     = LMOD(h, 1) U bh,l,g(GMOD(g))
                            = (el U (b) = {b,e}
             DMOD(h, 2)     = LMOD{ h,2) = 0
             DMOD( n, 1)    = LMOD(n, 1) = (k)
             DMOD(n, 2)     = LMOD(n, 2) = (y)
             DMOD(n, 3)     = LMOD(n, 3) = 0
             DMOD(m, 1)     = LMOD(m, 1) = (j3l
             DMOD(m, 2)     = LMOD{ m,2) = 0
634           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


19.2.2        Flow-Sensitive Side Effects: The Program Summary Graph
              Myers [Myer81 ] showed that computing flow-sensitive side effects is co-NP-complete,
              as long as aliasing is taken into account. He also introduced a model called the
              program supergraph that supports determination of flow-sensitive side effects.
                  Callahan [Call88] gives practical methods to compute approximate solutions of
              flow-sensitive problems based on the so-called program summary graph, which aug­
              ments the nodes in a graph derived from the call graph and the parameter-passing
              patterns with information about flow-sensitive effects inside the corresponding pro­
              cedures. The graph is intermediate in size and complexity between the call graph and
              Myers’s supergraph.
                  In this section, we give an overview of the program summary graph and the
              computation of flow-sensitive side-effect information it enables. We assume that
              the parameter-passing discipline is call by reference. Suppose that we are given a
              program comprising a set of procedures P. Then the program summary graph for
              P consists of two nodes for each formal parameter of each procedure, called entry
              and exit nodes; two nodes for each actual argument at each call site, called call and
              return nodes; and edges that connect call nodes to entry nodes, exit nodes to return
              nodes, and some entry and return nodes to call and exit nodes.
                  In greater detail, let p and q be procedures such that instruction i in p calls q.
              Then the formal parameters of q are

                   param (g, 1 ),. . ., p aram (g,n param s(g))

              and the actual arguments of the call to q are
                   a r g ( p , / , l ) a r g ( p , / , n param s(g))

              There is a call node c l ( p , / , a r g ( p , / , / ) ) and a return node r t ( p ,/ ,a r g ( p ,/ ,/ ) )
              for each triple (p, /,a r g ( p ,/ ,/) ), and an entry node en (g ,p a ra m (g ,/)) and an
              exit node e x (g ,p a r a m (g ,/)) for each pair (g,param (g,/)). There is an edge from
              c l ( p ,/ ,a r g ( p , / , / ) ) to e n (g ,p a ra m (g ,/)) and another from e x (g ,p a ra m (g ,/)) to
              r t ( p , /, a r g ( p ,/ , / ) ) . Also, there are edges as follows:

         1.   from en (p,param (p,/‘) ) to c l ( p , / , a r g ( p , / , £ ) ) if the value of paramCp,/) reaches
              call site (p, i) and is bound there to a r g (p ,/,& ),
         2.   from e n (p ,p a ra m (p ,/)) to ex(p ,param (p,& )) if the value of par am(p ,/) on entry
              to p reaches p ’s exit as the value of p aram (p,&),
         3.   from r t ( p , / , a r g ( p , / , / ) ) to c l ( p , £ , a r g ( p , £ , / ) ) if the value of a r g ( p ,/ ,/) on
              return to p reaches call site (p, k) as the value of a r g ( p ,£ ,/ ) , and
         4.   from r t ( p , / , a r g ( p , / , / ) ) to e x (p ,p a ra m (p ,£ )) if the value of a r g ( p ,/ ,/) on re­
              turn to p reaches p ’s exit as the value of par am(p ,£ ).

              We assume that at a call site an actual argument is used and then killed, that
              a procedure entry defines all formal parameters, and that a return uses all the
              parameters.
             Section 19.2      Interprocedural Data-Flow Analysis                                       635


                      procedure f(x)
             f        begin
              1           i := 2
              2           if x = 0 then
              3                j := g(j,0)
              4           else
              5                j := g(i,x)
              6           fi
              7           return j
                      end    || f
                      procedure g(a,b)
             g        begin
              1           if a > 1 then
              2                a := b + 2
              3           else
              4                b := h(a,b)
              5           fi
              6           return a + b + j
                      end    II g
                      procedure h(c,d)
             h        begin
              1            e := e/g(l,d)
              2            return e
                      end    II h

FIG. 19.19 An example program for flow-sensitive side-effect computation.


                 As an example, consider the program in Figure 19.19. Its program summary
             graph is shown in Figure 19.20. The following explains some of the edges:
        1.   There is an edge from e n (f ,x ) to e x ( f ,x ) because the value of x on entry to f ( )
             may reach its exit.
        2.   There is an edge from e n ( f ,x ) to c l ( f , 5 , x) because the value of x on entry to f ( )
             may be passed to formal parameter b of g ( ) at call site <f ,5>.
        3.   There is no edge from e n (f ,x ) to c l ( f ,3 , j ) because the value of x on entry to f ( )
             cannot be passed to formal parameter b of g ( ) at call site <f ,3>.
        4.   There is an edge from c l ( h , l , d ) to e n (g ,b ) because the value of d in the call to
             g ( ) at call site <h, 1> may be passed to formal parameter b of g ( ).
        5.   There is an edge from e x ( g ,b ) to r t ( f ,5 ,x ) because the value of b on exit from
             g ( ) is bound to the formal parameter x of f ( ).
                 Given the program summary graph, we can now define the properties Kill and
             Use. A variable v is killed (and Kill(v) is true) if it must be modified, regardless of
             control flow; it is used (and Use(v) is true) if there is a use of it before it is killed.
             Now, the set of killed variables, for example, can be determined by the data-flow
             equations
636          Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


             en(f,x)




 FIG. 19.20 Program summary graph for the program in Figure 19.19.




                             false               for x , an exit node
                                A     KiU(y)     for x , an entry or return node
                             x~>yeE
                 Kill(x) —
                             Kill(y) V Kill(z)   for x, a call node, and y and z,
                                                 the corresponding return and
                                                 entry nodes

             where E is the set of edges in the program summary graph. Similar equations
             apply for the Use( ) property, and the framework can be extended to handle global
             variables. Callahan gives efficient algorithms for computing the data-flow properties.
             The algorithms run in time bounded by 0 (n • s), where n is the number of procedures
             and s is a measure of the size of the program summary graph.
         Section 19.3     Interprocedural Constant Propagation                                    637

19.2.3   Other Issues in Computing Side Effects
         We have not discussed the effects of a series of issues that occur in real programs,
         such as recursion, aliasing, label variables, pointers, unions, procedure parameters,
         and exception handling. Interprocedural aliasing is discussed in Section 19.4. Some
         of the other issues are addressed by Weihl [Weih80], while others are addressed only
         in implemented systems, such as Parafrase [Kuck74] and ParaScope [CooH93].


19.3     Interprocedural Constant Propagation
         Interprocedural constant propagation can be formulated as either a site-independent
         or a site-specific method. The site-independent form determines, for each procedure
         in a program, the subset of its parameters such that each parameter has the same
         constant value in every invocation of the procedure. The site-specific form deter­
         mines, for each particular procedure called from each particular site, the subset of
         parameters that have the same constant values each time the procedure is called.
              In either case, the analysis problem comes within the criteria determined by
         Myers to make it either NP-complete or co-NP-complete, so the typical approach
         has been to invent less expensive but less precise methods.
              Callahan et al. [CalC86] describe a method to perform interprocedural constant
         propagation that may be either flow sensitive or flow insensitive, depending on the
         choice of what they call jump and return-jump functions. Our approach is derived
         from theirs. We assume for simplicity that the sets of formal parameters of the
         procedures that make up a program are non-intersecting.
              A jump function J ( p , i , L , x ) , for call site i in procedure p that calls procedure
         q with the list of actual arguments L, maps information about the actual arguments
         of the call from that call site to information about formal parameter x of q at its
         entry point. Similarly, a return-jump function R ( p ,L ,x ) , for a procedure p, maps
         the information about the list of formal parameters L of p to information about the
         value returned through formal parameter x by p. For example, for the procedures
         shown in Figure 19.23 below,
             J(f,1,[i,j],a) = i
             J(f,1, [i,j],b) = j
             R(g,[a,b],a) = 2
         are possible jump and return-jump function values for call site < f , 1> and procedure
         g ( ) (as we shall see below, they are “ pass-through parameter” jump and return-
         jump functions). Further, we define the support of jump function J (p ,/,L ,:x :),
         written J s u p p o r t ( p ,/ ,L ,x ) , to be the set of actual arguments used in defining
         J ( p , / , L , x ) ; similarly for return-jump functions. Thus, for our example we have
             Jsupport(f,1,[i,j],a) = {i}
             Jsupport(f,1,[i,j],b) = {j}
             RsupportCg,[a,b] ,a) = 0
             The interprocedural constant-propagation algorithm, using only forward jump
         functions, is shown in Figure 19.21. It uses the lattice ICP given in Figure 8.3 and
638           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


              procedure Intpr_Const_Prop(P,r ,Cval)
                 P: in set of Procedure
                 r : in Procedure
                 Cval: out Var — > ICP
              begin
                 WL := {r>: set of Procedure
                 p, q: Procedure
                 v: Var
                 i , j : in te g e r
                 p rev : ICP
                 Pars: Procedure — > set of Var
                 ArgList: Procedure x integer x Procedure
                     — > sequence of (Var u Const)
                 Eval: Expr x ICP — > ICP
                  I I construct sets of parameters and lists of arguments
                  II and initialize Cval( ) for each parameter
                 for each p e p do
                     Pars(p) := 0
                     for i := 1 to nparams(p) do
                         Cval(param(p,i)) := t
                         Pars(p) u= {param(p,i)>
                     od
                     for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                         for each q e callset(p,i) do
                             ArgList(p,i,q) := []
                             for j := 1 to nparams(q) do
                                     A r g L i s t(p ,i ,q ) ®= [ a r g ( p , i , j ) ]
                                od
                           od
                      od
                 od

 FIG. 19.21 Site-independent interprocedural constant-propagation algorithm.


              reproduced here in Figure 19.22. As in Chapter 8, T is the initial value for each
              putative constant-valued variable, constants represent themselves, and _L means that
              a variable’s value is not constant. The procedures used in the algorithm include one
              new one, namely, Eval(J(p,i,L,v) ,Cval), which evaluates J(p,i,L,v) over ICP,
              i.e., with the variables in Jsupport (p,i,L,v) getting their values from Cval( ) and
              with the operations performed over ICP. The programming language’s operations
              need to be mapped appropriately to operations on ICP, e.g.,

                  1+1 = 1
                  1+2 = 3
                  1+ T = T
                  As an example of interprocedural constant propagation, consider the program
              in Figure 19.23. A possible set of jump functions and their support sets for this
             Section 19.3        Interprocedural Constant Propagation                             639

                while WL * 0 do
                   p := ♦WL; WL -= {p>
                   for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                      for each q e callset(p,i) do
                         for j := 1 to nparams(q) do
                            II if q( )Js jth parameter can be evaluated using values that
                            II are arguments of p( ), evaluate it and update its Cval( )
                            if Jsupport(p,i,ArgList(p,i,q),param(q,j)) £ Pars(p) then
                               prev := Cval(param(q,j))
                               Cval(param(q,j)) n= Eval(J(p,i,
                                   ArgList(p,i,q),param(q,j)),Cval)
                                if Cval(param(q,j)) c prev then
                                   WL u= {q}
                               fi
                            fi
                         od
                      od
                   od
                od
             end    II Intpr_Const_Prop

FIG. 19.21 (continued)


                                        T



            false ...       -2     -1   0      1   2    ••• true


                                        ±
FIG. 19.22 Integer constant-propagation lattice ICP.


             program are shown in Table 19.10. For these jump-function values, the algorithm
             first initializes
                 Pars(e)     =0                ArgList(e,1,f) = [x,l]
                 Pars(f)     ={i,j>            ArgList(f,l,g) = [i,j]
                 Pars(g)     =              {a,b}    ArgList(f,2,g)  =[j]

                 Cval(i)     =              Cval(j) = Cval(a) = Cval(b)= t
             and WL = {e}. Then it removes e from WL and processes the one instruction in e ( ). It
             determines that f e callset(e, 1) is true, so it then iterates over the parameters (i
             and j) of f ( ). It evaluates J(e,l, [] ,i) = i and stores that value in Cval(i), also
             setting WL = { f } . Similar actions result in setting Cval(j) = 1. Next, the algorithm
             sets p = f and i = 1 and processes the call to g ( ) at that site. This results in setting
             Cval(a) = i and Cval(b) = 1. For i = 2, we get Cval(a) = J- and Cval(b) = 1
             again. The final result is
640            Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


                          procedure e( )
                          begin
               e                x, c: integer
                   1               c := f(x,l)
                          end
                          procedure f(i,j)
                          begin
               f                s, t: integer
                   1                s := g(i,j)
                   2                t :=
                   3                return s + t
                          end
                          procedure g(a,b)
               g          begin
                   1                a := 2
                   2                b := b + a
                   3                return a
                          end

  FIG. 19.23 An example for interprocedural constant propagation.


TABLE 19.10 Possible jump functions and their support sets
            for the example program in Figure 19.23.

               J ( e , l , [] , i ) = x          Jsupport(e, 1, [] ,i) = 0
               J ( e , l , [] , j) = 1           Jsupport(e, 1, [] ,j) = 0
               J ( f ,1, [ i , j ] , a) = i      Jsupport(f,1,[i,j],a) = {i>
               J ( f ,1, [ i , j],b) = j         Jsupport(f,1,[i,j],b) = {j}
               J ( f ,2, [ i , j ] ,a ) = j      Jsupport(f,2,[i,j],a) = {j>
               J ( f ,2,[i,j],b) = j             Jsupport(f,2,[i,j] ,b) = {j}*
                                                                             1




                       Cval(i) = ±
                       Cval(j) = 1
                       Cval(a) = x
                       Cval(b) = 1

               Thus, formal parameter j is constant at each call to f ( ) and b is constant at each
               call to g ( ).
                    There is a range of possible choices for jump and return-jump functions, ranging
               from individual constants to results of symbolic interpretation. They include the
               following:

          1.   Literal constant. This choice makes each J ( ) value either a constant, if the call site
               passes a literal constant, or X, and it does not propagate interprocedural constants
               through procedure bodies.
          2.   Interprocedural constant. This choice makes each J ( ) value either constant, if
               intraprocedural constant propagation can determine it to be so, or X otherwise.
            Section 19.4     Interprocedural Alias Analysis                                       641

       3.   Pass-through parameter. This choice (which is the one we used in the example above)
            uses interprocedural constants, where they are available, as values of parameters that
            are passed through to a called routine unchanged, or X otherwise.
       4.   Polynomial parameter. This choice uses intraprocedural constants where available
            and polynomial functions of the parameters passed to a routine if the value of an
            actual argument passed within the procedure is a polynomial in its parameters, and
            ± otherwise.
       5.   Symbolic execution. This approach simulates the execution of each procedure to
            determine constant parameter values.

            These choices range, in numerical order, from least to most expensive and, corre­
            spondingly, from least to most informative. Grove and Torczon [GroT93] discuss
            jump and return-jump functions, their computational costs, and the information
            they provide.
                 Use of jump functions allows computation of both call-site-independent and
            call-site-specific constants in time 0 (n + e), for a call graph with n nodes and e
            edges and for all but the most complex choices of jump functions. For the call-site-
            specific form, we modify the algorithm by converting the procedures to SSA form
            (for computational efficiency) and evaluate them flow sensitively.
                 Return-jump functions are useful only in the call-site-specific (or flow-sensitive)
            form of analysis. To understand this, consider our example program in Figure 19.23.
            The natural time to use the return-jump functions is in a prepass over the program
            (before using the forward jump functions) performed from the leaves of the call
            graph (including arbitrarily selected members of leaf strongly connected compo­
            nents). The natural choice of return-jump function for procedure g ( ) and parameter
            a is R(g, [a,b ] ,a ) = 2 . With this choice, we would set C v al(a) = 2 for call site 1 in
            procedure f ( ). This choice, however, is not appropriate: if we now perform con­
            stant propagation with forward jump functions, we have a value for C v al(a) that
            applies to calls of g ( ) after the first one, but not to the first one. Thus, flow sensi­
            tivity is essential if we use return-jump functions. Using return-jump functions does
            not affect the computational complexity of the algorithm.
                 Call-site-specific interprocedural constant propagation can be used to drive pro­
            cedure cloning, as discussed in Section 19.5.



19.4        Interprocedural Alias Analysis
            As discussed in Chapter 10, intraprocedural aliasing possibilities differ significantly
            from one language to another, with the extremes represented by Fortran and C. In
            interprocedural alias analysis, an additional dimension is added, namely, two-level
            scoping, as in both Fortran and C, versus multi-level scoping, as found, for example,
            in Pascal, PL/I, and Mesa.
                The Fortran standards specifically prohibit assignment to an aliased variable. C,
            on the other hand, allows one to take the address of almost any object, pass it almost
            anywhere, and do nearly arbitrary things with it.
642           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


              global i, j
              procedure f( )
              begin
                 g(i)
                 g ( j)
              end
              procedure g(a)
              begin
                  i := i + 1
                 j    j + 1
                 return a
              end

 FIG. 19.24 An example of interprocedural aliasing.


                   Interprocedural aliases are generally created by parameter passing and by access
              to nonlocal variables. As discussed in the introduction to Chapter 10, the char­
              acterization of aliasing as a relation depends on whether we are taking time (or,
              equivalently, flow sensitivity) into account. We are concerned with flow-insensitive
              aliasing here, except in the discussion of languages with call by value and pointers
              in Section 19.4.2. As an example of the intransitivity of flow-insensitive interpro­
              cedural aliasing, consider the code in Figure 19.24 and assume that parameters are
              passed by reference. Then i alias a and j alias a ate valid, but it is not the case that
              i alias j .
                   Flow-sensitive alias analysis is at least as expensive as flow-sensitive side-effect
              analysis (see Section 19.2.2), so we content ourselves with a flow-insensitive ver­
              sion for call by reference and a malleable version for call by value with pointers,
              where malleable means that it may be flow sensitive or not, as in the discussion of
              intraprocedural alias analysis in Sections 10.2 and 10.3.

19.4.1        Flow-Insensitive Alias Analysis
              We use the function ALIAS: Var x Procedure —> s e t of Var to describe the sets
              of all aliases in each procedure in a program. In particular, ALIAS(x, p) = s if and
              only if s consists of all the variables that may be aliases of x in procedure p.
                   The basic idea for computing ALIAS is to follow all the possible chains of
              argument-parameter and nonlocal variable-parameter bindings at all call sites in
              depth-first order, incrementally accumulating alias pairs.
                   An efficient approach developed by Cooper and Kennedy [CooK89] handles
              formal parameters and nonlocal variables separately, based on the observation that
              nonlocal variables can only have formal parameters as aliases, as long as the source
              language does not allow pointer aliasing. This significantly reduces the number of
              pairs that might need to be computed. We describe an approach based on theirs.
                   For a language like Pascal or Mesa in which procedures may be nested and
              visibility of variables is determined by the nesting, there are two complications in
              alias determination. One is that formal parameters to a routine at nesting level /
              may be nonlocal variables to a routine contained within it at nesting level m > /.
     Section 19.4     Interprocedural Alias Analysis                                      643

     The other is essentially the mirror image of the first complication, i.e., that variables
     defined at nesting level / are not visible at levels less than /. To describe this problem
     further, we use the concept of the extended formal-parameter set of a procedure,
     which we develop below.
          In outline, for a program P, the approach to alias determination consists of four
     steps, as follows:

1.   First, we construct an extended version of the program’s binding graph B (see
     Section 19.2.1 and Figure 19.26) that takes extended formal parameters into account
     and its pair binding graph n (see below).
2.   Next, we solve a forward data-flow problem over B to compute, for each formal
     parameter /*p, the set A(fp) of variables v (not including formal parameters) that fp
     may be aliased to by a call chain that binds v to fp.
3.   Next, we perform a marking algorithm on n (which may also be thought of as
     solving a forward data-flow analysis problem) to determine formal parameters that
     may be aliased to each other.
4.   Finally, we combine the information from the preceding steps.

     Once the aliasing information has been obtained, it can be combined with the alias-
     free solutions to interprocedural data-flow problems to produce the full solutions.
          The set of extended formal parameters of a procedure p, written ExtFormals(p)
     is the set of all formal parameters visible within p, including those of procedures
     that p is nested in, that are not rendered invisible by intervening declarations. For
     example, in Figure 19.25 the extended formal parameter set of procedure n( ) is
     {m,z,w}.
          The modified version of the code to build the binding graph is shown in Fig­
     ure 19.26 (note that only the routine Bind_Pairs( ) differs from the version in
     Figure 19.13). The value of passed( p ,i ,q ,x ,y ) is true if instruction i in proce­
     dure p calls procedure q and binds p ’s extended formal parameter x to q’s extended
     formal parameter y, and false otherwise.
          As an example of this process, we use the program in Figure 19.25. We dis­
     tinguish the global b and the one local to h( ) by subscripting them as bi and b2 ,
     respectively, in what follows. Note that to allow totally general naming of vari­
     ables and parameters, we need to identify the sequence of procedures each variable
     is nested in; e.g., we might denote the global b by <b, []>, the local b in h( ) by
     <b, [h] >, and the parameter y of t ( ) by <y, [h ,t] >. The example’s call and binding
     graphs are shown in Figure 19.27.
          A nonlocal variable can only become aliased to a formal parameter in a proce­
     dure in which the nonlocal variable is visible and only by its being passed as an actual
     argument to that formal parameter. So we define A(fp), where fp is a formal param­
     eter, to be the set of nonlocal variables v (including formal parameters of routines
     that the declaration of fp is nested in) that fp may be aliased to by a chain of one or
     more calls that binds v to fp. To compute A ( ), we make two forward passes over the
     binding graph B, first accumulating bindings that pass nonlocal variables as param­
     eters, and then following binding chains. The algorithm Nonlocal_Aliases( ) that
644           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


                       global a, b
                       procedure e( )
              e       begin
                  1        a := f(1,b)
                       end     I| e
                       procedure f(x,y)
              f       begin
                  1         y := h(l,2,x,x)
                  2         return g(a,y) + b + y
                       end     I| f
                       procedure g(z,w)
                           local c
                          procedure n(m)
              n          begin
                  1             a :=p(z,m)
                  2             return m + a + c
                           end     || n
              g       begin
               1            w := n(c) + h(l,z,w,4)
               2            return h(z,z,a,w) + n(w)
                       end      || g
                       procedure h(i,j,k,l)
                           local b
                          procedure t(u,v)
              t          begin
                  1             return u + v * p(u,b)
                          end      || t
              h        begin
               1            b := j * 1 + t(j,k)
               2            return i + t(b,k)
                       end      || h
                       procedure p(r,s)
              p        begin
                  1         b := r * s
                       end      || p

 FIG* 19.25 An example program for interprocedural alias computation.



              does this is given in Figure 19.28; the N, R, and E arguments are the sets of nodes,
              roots, and edges in the binding graph, respectively. The procedures used in the figure
              are as follows:1

         1.   Shallow er (v) is the set of variables declared at nesting levels less than or equal to
              the nesting level at which v is declared.
         2.   Form als(p) is the set of formal parameters of procedure p.
         3.   N onlocals (p) is the set of variables that are nonlocal to p and that are not formal
              parameters of any procedure in which p is nested.
            Section 19.4    Interprocedural Alias Analysis               645


            procedure Build_Binding_Graph(P,N,E,pinsts)
                P: in set of Procedure
                N: out set of Var
                E: out set of (Var x Var)
               pinsts: in Procedure — > integer
            begin
                p, q: Procedure
                i, m, n: integer
                oldE: set of (Var x Var)
               N := E := oldE := 0
                repeat
                   oldE := E
                   for each p e p do
                       for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                          for each q e callset(p,i) do
                             Bind.Pairs(p,i ,q ,N ,E)
                          od
                       od
                   od
               until E = oldE
               repeat
                   oldE := E
                   for each e e E do
                       for each f e E (f * e) do
                          if e@2 = f@l & e@l * f@2 then
                             E u= {e@l-^f@2}
                          fi
                       od
                   od
               until E = oldE
            end      II Build_Binding_Graph

            procedure Bind_Pairs(p,i,q,N,E)
               p, q: in Procedure
                i : in integer
               N: inout set of Var
               E: inout set of (Var x Var)
            begin
               e, f: Var x Var
               for each u e ExtFormals(q) do
                    for each v e ExtFormals(p) do
                       if passedCp,i,q,v,u) then
                          N u= {u,v}
                          E u= {v-^u}
                       fi
                    od
                od
            end      II Bind_Pairs

FIG. 19.26 Algorithm to construct the binding graph B for a program P.
646            Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization




 FIG. 19.27 The (a) call and (b) binding graphs for the program in Figure 19.25.


          4.   ExtForm als(p) is the set of all formal parameters visible within p, including those
               of procedures that p is nested in that are not shadowed by intervening definitions.
          5.   T op.Sort (N , E) returns a sequence of edges drawn from E that represents a topo­
               logical sort of the graph with nodes N and edges E with the back edges removed.
               (Note that there may be more than one root.)

               If we define Envt(p) to be the sequence of procedures that procedure p is nested
               in, with p as the last member of the sequence, and V ars(p) to be the set of formal
               parameters and local variables of procedure p, then ExtForm als(p) can be defined
               by the recurrence

                   ExtForm als(E nvt(p) 11) = F orm als(E n vt(p )11)

                   ExtForm als(Envt (pHz‘) = Formals (Envt (p )l/)
                       u (ExtForm als (Envt (p) 4 (/—1) ) - Vars(Envt (p )l/) )
                             for *1 < i < |E n v t(p )|

                    For our example program, N on lo cal_ A liases( ) first initializes the function
               A( ) to 0, then iterates over the calls accumulating nonlocal variables that are aliased
               to the formal parameters, and finally propagates alias information forward in the
               binding graph, resulting in the values shown in Table 19.11(a).
                    Now the set of formal parameters that are aliased to each nonlocal variable
               can be computed by inverting the function A( ). This is done by the procedure
               In v e rt_ N o n lo cal_ A liases( ) shown in Figure 19.29, which simply sets A L IA S()
             Section 19.4    Interprocedural Alias Analysis                                      647

             procedure Nonlocal_Aliases(P,N ,E ,A)
                P: in set of Procedure
                N: in set of Var
                E: in set of (Var x Var)
                A: out Var — > set of Var
             begin
                v: Var
                e: Var x Var
                p, q: Procedure
                i, j: integer
                oldA: Var — > set of Var
                T: sequence of (Var x Var)
                A := 0
                for each p e p do
                   for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                       for each q e callset(p,i) do
                          for each v e (Nonlocals(q)
                             u (ExtFormals(q) - Formals(q))) do
                             for j := 1 to nparams(q) (v = arg(p,i,j)) do
                                I| accumulate nonlocal variables and nonlocal formal
                                I| parameters that may be aliases of q( V s jth parameter
                                A(param(q,j)) u= {v}
                             od
                          od
                       od
                   od
                od
                T := Top_Sort(N,E)
                repeat
                   oldA := A
                   for i := 1 to |T| do
                       I| accumulate nonlocals along edges in binding graph
                       A(Tli@2) u= A(Tli@l) n Shallower(Tli@l)
                   od
                until oldA = A
             end     II Nonlocal.Aliases

FIG. 19.28 Algorithm for efficiently computing aliases of nonlocal variables using the binding
           graph B.


             to the empty function and then accumulates values from the A( ) sets. For our
             example, it results in the values shown in Table 19.11(b).
                 Formal parameters may become aliased in several ways. For example, two p a­
             rameters are aliases of each other if the same actual argument is bound to both
             of them. Also, if a nonlocal variable is passed to a formal parameter of a rou­
             tine and a variable aliased to the nonlocal variable is passed to another formal
             parameter, the two formal parameters are aliases of each other. In addition, formal-
             parameter aliases can be passed through chains of calls, creating more aliased
             formal parameters.
648              In te rp ro ce d u ral A n aly sis and O p tim iza tio n


TA BLE 19*11 (a )T h e A ( ) sets computed by N o n lo c a l_ A lia se s( )
             and (b) the ALIAS ( ) sets computed by
             In v e r t_ N o n lo c a l_ A lia se s ( ) for our
             example program in Figure 19.25.

                 A(i) = {a,z}                 A(j) = {a,z}                  A(k) = {a,bi ,w}
                 A(l) = {bi ,w}               A(m) = {bi ,c,w}              A(r) = {a,b2,j,z}
                 A(s) = {bi,c,b2}             A(u) = {a,b2,j}               A(v) = {a,k}
                 A(w) = {bi>                  A(x) = 0                      A(y) = {bi>
                 A(z) = {a}
                 (a)

                 ALIAS(a,e) = 0                             ALIAS(bi.e) = 0
                 ALIAS(a.f) = 0                             ALIAS(bi,f) = {y}
                 ALIAS(a,g) = {z}                           ALIAS(bi.g) = {w}
                 ALIAS(a,h) = {i,j,k}                       ALIAS(bi.h) = {k,l>
                 ALIAS(a,n) = {z}                           ALIAS(bi,n) = {m,w}
                 ALIAS(a,p) = {r}                           ALIAS(bi,p) = 0
                 ALIAS(a,t) = {i,j,k,u,v}                   ALIAS(bi.t) = {s,k,l>

                 ALIAS(c,e) = 0                             ALIAS(b2,e) = 0
                 ALIAS(c.f) = 0                             ALIAS(b2,f) = 0
                 ALIAS(c,g) = 0                             ALIAS(b2,g) = 0
                 ALIAS(c,h) = 0                             ALIAS(b2,h) = 0
                 ALIAS(c,n) = {m}                           ALIAS(b2,n) = 0
                 ALIASCc,p) = 0                             ALIAS(b2,p) = 0
                 ALIAS(c.t) = 0                             ALIAS(b2,t) = {u}
                 (b)

                 Nonlocals, ExtFormals: Procedure — > set of Var

                 procedure Invert_Nonlocal_Aliases(P,A ,ALIAS)
                     P: in set of Procedure
                     A: in Var — > set of Var
                     ALIAS: out (Var x Procedure) — > set of Var
                 begin
                     p: Procedure
                     x , v : Var
                     ALIAS := 0
                     for each p e P do
                         for each v e ExtFormals(p) do
                             for each x e A(v) n Nonlocals(p) do
                                 ALIAS(x,p) u= {v}
                             od
                         od
                     od
                 end       II Invert_Nonlocal_Aliases

  FIG . 19.29    Algorithm to invert the nonlocal alias function, thus computing the set of formal
                 parameters aliased to each nonlocal variable.
            Section 19.4     Interprocedural Alias Analysis                                            649

            procedure Build_Pair_Graph(P,N ,E)
               P: in set of Procedure
               N: out set of (Var x Var)
               E: out set of ((Var x Var) x (Var x Var))
            begin
               p, q, r: Procedure
               и, v, w, x, y: Var
               к, s: integer
                N := 0
                E := 0
               for each p e P do
                  for each u,v e ExtFormals(p) do
                     N u= {<u,v>}
                  od
               od
               for each p e P do
                  for k := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                     for each q e callset(p,k) do
                        for each u,v e ExtFormals(q) do
                           for each w,x e ExtFormals(p) do
                              if match(p,q,k,w,u,x,v) then
                                  E u= {<w,x>-*<u,v>}
                              elif 3r e P 3s € integer 3w e Var
                                  (pair_match(p,u,v,q,s,r,w,x,y)) then
                                  E u= {<u,v)-><x,y>}
                              fi
                           od
                        od
                     od
                  od
               od
            end    II Build_Pair_Graph

FIG. 19.30 Algorithm to build a program’s pair binding graph n.


                 To model this situation, we use a pairwise analogue of the binding graph called
            the pair binding graph n = (Nn, En) in which each node is a pair of extended formal
            parameters of the same procedure and each edge models the binding of one pair to
            another by a call. Code to build the pair binding graph for a program is shown in
            Figure 19.30.
                 The function match(p ,q ,k ,w ,u ,x ,v ) returns tru e if instruction k in proce­
            dure p calls procedure q and passes p ’s extended formal parameters w and x to q's
            extended formal parameters u and v, respectively, and f a l s e otherwise.
                 The function p a ir_ m a tc h (p ,w ,i/,^ ,s,r,w /,x ,y ) returns tru e if there are ex­
            tended formal parameters u and v of p and a call site s in procedure q nested inside
            q such that, for some procedure r, (g, s) calls procedure r and binds u and w to
            r’s extended formal parameters x and y, respectively, and v e A(u/); and f a l s e
            otherwise. If there exist procedures, integers, variables, and call sites satisfying
            pair_m at ch (p , u , v , q , s , r , w , x , y), we add an edge from (m, v) to (x, y), as shown
            in Figure 19.31.
650           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


               P




                          VG A(w)

 FIG. 19.31 Schema for adding arcs that satisfy pair_match( ) to the pair binding graph. Given that
            procedure p has extended formal parameters u and v, procedure q nested inside p has at
            call site <g,s> a call to procedure r that passes u to formal parameter x of r and w to y,
            and v e A(w), we put the edge <m,             y> into the pair binding graph n.

                      The pair binding graph for our example is shown in Figure 19.32.
                      To find the pairs of formal parameters that may be aliases of each other, we
              mark the program’s pair binding graph as follows: If a variable is passed to two
              distinct formal parameters of a routine, then the two formal parameters are aliases
              of each other, and so the corresponding node in the pair binding graph is marked.
              Also, if (1) a nonlocal variable is passed to a formal parameter of procedure q, (2)
              a formal parameter of q’s caller is passed to another formal parameter of g, and (3)
              the caller’s formal parameter is an alias of the nonlocal variable, then the two formal
              parameters of q may be aliases, so that pair is marked. The algorithm is shown in
              Figure 19.33.
                      For our example, this results in marking (k ,l), (l,k ), ( i , j) , (j ,i ) , ( r ,s ), (j ,k),
              ( j , l ) , ( i ,1), (u,v), ( s ,r ) , (k ,j) , ( l , j ) , ( l , i ) , and (v,u). The marking is denoted
              by the shaded circles in Figure 19.32. Note that (r ,s ) and (s ,r ) are the only nodes
              marked by the if statement that is identified with an asterisk in Figure 19.33.
                      Next, the routine Prop_Marks( ) in Figure 19.34 is used to propagate the marks
              forward through the pair binding graph to make sure that aliasing of a routine’s
              formal parameters is properly passed along to formal parameters of routines it calls.
              This is done by maintaining a worklist of nodes in the pair binding graph that are
              marked. As each node is removed from the worklist, edges are followed from that
              node and the nodes that are reached are marked and placed on the worklist if they
              were previously unmarked. For our example, this results in marking no additional
              pairs.
                      Next, we compute formal-parameter aliases by combining A( ) and ALIAS( )
              sets and Mark( ) information. Formal.Aliases ( ), the routine that does so, is
              straightforward and is shown in Figure 19.35. It uses the procedure Outside_In(P),
              whose value is a sequence that is a topological sort of the nesting order of the
              procedures that make up P, with the outermost procedure(s) given first. For our
              example, this results in the alias sets shown in Table 19.12.
            Section 19.4     Interprocedural Alias Analysis

                                                                                  <x,y> O

                                                                                  <y»x> o
            < k ,l > ®     < l ,k > ®       <i»j>

                                                                                  <y»y> O

                                                                                  <w,w> o


                                                                                  <m,m> O


                                                                                  <i,i> o



                                                                                  < i,k > O



                                                                                  < i,k > O



                                                                                  <j >j > o


                                                                                  < k ,i> O



                                                                                  <k,k> O



                                                                                  < 1,1> o



                                  <v»v> O           <r,r> O      < s,s> O         <u,u> Q
FIG. 19.32 Pair binding graph n for our example program. The nodes and edges are produced by
            Build_Pair_Graph( ). The shaded nodes are marked by M ark_Alias_Pairs( ). No
            additional nodes are marked by Prop_Marks ( ).



                The time bound for this approach to alias computation is 0 (n 2 + n - e), where n
            and e are the numbers of nodes and edges, respectively, in the program’s call graph.
                To combine aliasing information with the alias-free version of a side-effect
            computation, we use the algorithm shown in Figure 19.36, where M OD is used as an
            example. In essence, we initialize M O D to D M O D and then add formal-parameter
            and nonlocal-variable aliases to it.
652           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization

              procedure Mark_Alias_Pairs(P,Mark,ALIAS)
                  P: in set of Procedure
                  Mark: out (Var x Var) — > boolean
                  ALIAS: in (Var x Procedure) — > set of Var
              begin
                  p, q: Procedure
                  i, j, k, 1: integer
                  u, v, w, x, y: Var
                  Mark := 0
                  for each p e P do
                     for i := 1 to numinsts(p) do
                         for each q e callset(p,i) do
                            for each u,v e ExtFormals(q) (u * v) do
                               if 3w,x e ExtFormals(p)
                                  (match(p,q,i,w,u,x,v)) then
                                  Mark(u,v) := Mark(v,u) := true
                               fi
                            od
              *             if 3y e ExtFormals(p) 3k e integer
                               (y = arg(p,i,k)) then
                               for each w e Nonlocals(p) do
                                  if 31 e integer (w = arg(p,i,l)
                                     & y e ALIAS(w,p)) then
                                     Mark(param(q,k),param(q,l)) := true
                                     Mark(param(q,l),param(q,k)) := true
                                  fi
                               od
                            fi
                         od
                     od
                  od
              end      |I Mark_Alias_Pairs

 FIG. 19.33 Algorithm to mark parameter pairs in a program’s pair binding graph.


              procedure Prop_Marks(N,E,Mark)
                 N: in set of (Var x Var)
                 E: in set of ((Var x Var) x (Var x Var))
                 Mark: inout (Var x Var) — > boolean
              begin
                 n: Var x Var
                 f: (Var x Var) x (Var x Var)
                 WL := 0: set of (Var x Var)
                 for each n e N do
                    if Mark(n@l,n@2) then
                       WL u= {n}
                    fi
                 od

 FIG. 19.34 Algorithm to propagate marking of parameter pairs in a program’s pair binding graph.
                Section 19.4     Interprocedural Alias Analysis                               653


                   while WL * 0 do
                       n := ♦WL; WL -= {n}
                       for each f e E (f@l = n) do
                          if !Mark(f@2@l,f@2@2) then
                              Mark(f@2@l,f@2@2) := true
                              WL u= {f@2}
                          fi
                       od
                    od
                end     || Prop_Marks

  FIG. 19.34    (continued)

                procedure Formal_Aliases(P,Mark,A,ALIAS)
                   P: in set of Procedure
                   Mark: in (Var x Var) — > boolean
                   A: in Var — > set of Var
                   ALIAS: inout (Var x Procedure) — > set of Var
                begin
                    01: sequence of Procedure
                   p: Procedure
                    i: integer
                   v: Var
                    01 := Outside_In(P)
                   for i := 1 to 1011 do
                       p := Olli
                       for j := 1 to nparams(p) do
                          ALIAS(param(p,j),p) := A(param(p,j))
                          for each v e ExtFormals(p) do
                             if param(p,j) * v & Mark(param(p,j),v) then
                                 ALIAS(param(p,j),p) u= {v}
                                 ALIAS(v,p) u= {param(p,j)}
                             fi
                          od
                       od
                   od
                end     |I Formal.Aliases

  FIG. 19.35    Algorithm to compute formal-parameter alias information from Mark( ), A( ), and
                ALIAS ( ).

TA BLE 19.12 Alias sets for formal parameters computed by F o rm a l_ A lia se s( )
             for our example program in Figure 19.25.

                ALIAS(x,f) = 0                       ALIAS(y,f) = {bi>
                ALIAS(z,g) = {a}                     ALIAS(w,g) = {bi>
                ALIAS(i,h) = {a,j,k,1}               ALIASCj,h) = {a,i,k,l>
                ALIAS(k,h) = {a,bi, i , j ,1}        ALIASCl.h) = {bi,i,j,k}
                ALIAS(m,n) = {bi,c}                  ALIAS(u,t) = {a,b2,v}
                ALIAS(v,t) = {a,u}                   ALIAS(r,p) = {a,b2,s}
                ALIAS(s,p) = {bi,c,r}
654           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


              p r o c e d u r e M O D _ w it h _ A lia s e s ( P , A L IA S , DMOD, MOD)
                    P:    in    s e t o f P ro ce d u re
                    A L IA S : i n ( V a r x P r o c e d u r e ) — > s e t o f V a r
                    DMOD: i n ( P r o c e d u r e x in t e g e r ) — > s e t o f V a r
                    MOD: o u t ( P r o c e d u r e x in t e g e r ) — > s e t o f V a r
              b e g in
                     p , q : P ro ce d u re
                     i : in t e g e r
                    v : Var
                    f o r e a c h p e P do
                          f o r i := 1 t o n u m in s t s ( p ) do
                                   I I in it ia liz e       MOD w it h d i r e c t MOD
                                  M 0 D ( p ,i) := DMOD(p, i )
                                   I | a dd f o r m a l-p a r a m e t e r a l i a s e s
                                  f o r e a c h v e F o r m a ls ( p ) do
                                         if   v e D M 0 D (p ,i) t h e n
                                               M 0 D ( p ,i) U— A L I A S ( v ,p )
                                         fi
                                   od
                                    I | a dd n o n l o c a l - v a r i a b l e a l i a s e s
                                   f o r e a c h v e N o n lo c a ls ( p ) n D M 0 D (p ,i) do
                                         M 0 D ( p ,i)   u= A L I A S ( v ,p )
                                   od
                           od
                    od
              end         I I M O D _ w ith _ A lia s e s

 FIG. 19.36 Algorithm to combine aliasing information with alias-free side-effect information.



19.4.2        Interprocedural Alias Analysis for Languages
              with Call by Value and Pointers
              To do interprocedural alias analysis for a language such as C with call by value
              and pointers, we expand on the intraprocedural approach discussed in Sections 10.2
              and 10.3. In particular, we initialize the Ovr( ) and Ptr( ) functions on entry to
              a procedure from its call sites and set them on return to the call sites from the
              information at the return point of the called procedure. We can either do the analysis
              individually for each call site or we can do it for all calls to a particular routine at
              once.
                   First, assume that we are doing one call site at a time. Let P and P' be the
              program points immediately preceding and following a call site, respectively, and let
              entry+ and re tu rn - be the program points following the entry point of a routine
              and preceding the return, respectively, as shown in Figure 19.37. Then we initialize
              the functions as follows for a nonlocal variable x:
                    Ovr(e n try+, x) = Ovr( P, x)
                      Ptr(e n try+, x) = Ptr( P, x)
             Section 19.4               Interprocedural Alias Analysis                       655


                                                       [   e n try   j

                        P'                                      e n try *


             c a ll f ( . . . )


                        P                                       re tu rn -

                                                       f   e x it    j


FIG. 19.37 Call site, entry, and return of a C routine.


             in t   *p, *q;
             in t   * f ( in t    *q)
             <■     p = q;
                    re tu rn p;
             >

             i n t m a in ( )
             {     in t a , * r;
                   r = f(& a );
             }
FIG. 19.38 An example C program for interprocedural alias analysis.


             and as follows for an actual argument y that is passed to formal parameter x:

                    Ovr(e ntry+, x) = Ovr{ P ', y)
                     Ptr(e ntry+, x) = Ptr{ P ', y)

             For the return, we do the reverse for a nonlocal variable x , namely,

                    Ovr(P', x) = Ovr( re tu rn -, x)
                     Ptr( P ', x) = P^r(return-, x)

                 For example, consider the C code in Figure 19.38. Computation of the Ptr( )
             function results in
                    Ptr( P, p) = star{ a)
                    Ptr( P, q) = star( a)
                    Ptr( P, r) = star( a)

             where P denotes the program point in main( ) immediately following the return
             from f ( ).
656         Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


                To do all call sites         ,...,    for a particular routine at once, we set

                                        k
                Oi/r(entry+, x) = |^J Ovr(Pj , x)
                                       i=1

                                        k
                 Ptr(entry+, x) =            Ptr(Pi , x)
                                       i=1

            for a nonlocal variable x and the corresponding adaptations of the equations above
            for parameter passing and for nonlocal variables at return points.



19.5        Interprocedural Optimizations
            Given the tools for interprocedural control-flow, data-flow, and alias analysis dis­
            cussed in the preceding sections, several kinds of optimization become possible, as
            follows:

       1.   We can use the information gathered by interprocedural analysis to drive procedure
            integration.
       2.   We can use the information provided by site-independent constant-propagation ana­
            lysis to optimize the bodies of procedures that are found to be always called with the
            same one or more constant parameters.
       3.   We can use the information provided by site-specific constant-propagation analysis
            to clone copies of a procedure body and to optimize them for specific call sites.
       4.   We can use the side-effect information to tailor the calling conventions for a specific
            call site to optimize caller versus callee register saving.
       5.   We can optimize call-by-value parameter passing of large arguments that are not
            modified to be passed by reference.
       6.   Finally, and frequently most important, we can use interprocedural data-flow infor­
            mation to improve intraprocedural data-flow information for procedure entries and
            exits and for calls and returns.

                Interprocedural analysis can provide much of the information needed to guide
            procedure integration, such as the number of call sites and information about
            constant-valued parameters. See Section 15.2 for the details.
                How to optimize based on constant parameters should be obvious. In the
            intermediate-code form of the procedure’s body, we replace the constant-valued
            parameters with their values and we perform global optimization, as discussed in
            Chapters 12 through 18, on the result. We also tailor the calling and entry code
            for the procedure to not pass or receive the constant parameters. We do the re­
            placement in the intermediate code, rather than in the source code, because a future
              Section 19.5      Interprocedural Optimizations                                      657

              modification to the source program may invalidate the information on which the
              optimization is based.
                   Optimizing based on parameters being constant at one or more call sites (called
              procedure specialization or cloning) is almost as easy. For each set of call sites that
              call the same procedure and that pass the same constant values to one or more of its
              parameters, we clone a copy of the intermediate code of the body of the procedure
              and then perform the same optimizations as described in the preceding paragraph
              on the clone and its call sites.
                   One optimization that is frequently enabled by these two cases is the elimination
              of unnecessary bounds checking within procedures. Many routines are written, for
              example, to manipulate arrays of arbitrary size, but are used in particular program s
              only on arrays whose sizes are determined in the main program. Propagating that
              information to the general-case routines allows them to be tailored to the particular
              application and may result in nontrivial speedup or make it easier to perform other
              optimizations. For example, propagating the fact that in Figure 15.5 sa x p y ( ) is
              called only with in cx = in cy = 1 allows it to be reduced to the code shown in
              Figure 19.39. Note that it also makes integrating the body of saxpy ( ) into s g e f a ( )
              easier.

                     subroutine sgefa(a,lda,n,ipvt,info)
                     integer Ida,n,ipvt(1),info
                     real a(lda,l)
                     real t
                     integer isamax,j,k,kpl,l,nml

                             do 30 i = kpl, n
                                t = a(l,j)
                                if (1 .eq. k) go to 20
                                   a(l,j) = a(k,j)
                                   a(k,j) = t
                20              continue
                                call saxpy_ll(n-k,t,a(k+l,k),a(k+l,j))
                30           continue

                   subroutine saxpy.ll(n,da,dx,dy)
                   real dx(1),dy(1),da
                   integer i,ix,iy,m,mpl,n
                   if (n .le. 0) return
                   if (da .eq. ZERO) return
                   do 30 i = l,n
                       dy(i) = dy(i) + da*dx(i)
                30 continue
                   return
                   end

.FIG* 19.39 The Unpack routine saxpy ( ) and its calling context in sg e f a ( ) after determining that
            incx = incy = 1 and propagating that information into the body of saxpy ( ).
658   Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


           Note also that such constants are sometimes conveyed to procedures by global
      variables rather than by parameters and that this case is worth analyzing and using
      as well.
           Optimizing call-by-value parameter passing to call by reference for large objects,
      such as arrays and records, depends on determining for such a parameter a of a pro­
      cedure p whether a e M O D (p). If it is not, then p and its descendants in the call
      graph do not modify a, so it is safe to modify the way it is passed to call by ref­
      erence. Doing so involves changing the code that accesses the actual argument and
      formal parameter to use its address instead of its value. Also, if there is a point in
      the call graph at which we know that the argument is not modified (perhaps from
      an interface specification), but we don’t have the code available to change the pa­
      rameter passing, we must convert the parameter passing back to call by value at that
      point.
           Finally, many of the intraprocedural optimizations discussed in Chapters 12
      through 18 can be improved by the use of precise, conservative interprocedural
      data-flow information. It can both improve optimization around call sites by using
      information about the called procedure and improve optimization within proce­
      dures by using information about parameters and global variables. For example,
      loop-invariant code motion (see Section 13.2) can be improved when applied to
      a loop that contains a call if it can be determined that the call has no side ef­
      fects on expressions that are determined to be loop-invariant by intraprocedural
      means.
           To apply interprocedural data-flow information to global (intraprocedural)
      data-flow analysis, we do the interprocedural analysis first and then use its results
      to initialize the global data-flow information for procedure entries and exits and to
      turn calls from opaque objects into operations for which the effects on the data-flow
      information are understood. In some cases, significant benefit can be obtained from
      iterating the computation of interprocedural followed by intraprocedural data-flow
      information, but this is usually not worth the large increase in compilation time that
      it costs, unless it can be hidden from the user by being done as a background activity
      while the programmer is occupied with other tasks.
           For example, global constant propagation (see Section 12.6) can be made to
      take account of interprocedural constant propagation by initializing the constant
      information for a procedure’s entry point with the information provided by inter­
      procedural analysis.
           Another overall approach to optimization that has been explored by Srivastava
      and Wall [SriW93] is one that, as an early step in the linking process, takes as its
      input and produces as its output a series of object modules. In its prototype ver­
      sion, it transforms each object module into a register-transfer-language (RTL) rep­
      resentation, does interprocedural control-flow and live variables analyses, and then
      does interprocedural dead-code elimination and global and interprocedural loop-
      invariant code motion. Finally, it does global copy propagation, global common-
      subexpression elimination, and interprocedural dead-store elimination, followed by
      turning the RTL back into object modules to be linked. This approach provides
      surprisingly good results, especially considering that it depends on no informa-
              Section 19.6    Interprocedural Register Allocation                              659

              tion produced by earlier phases of compilation except, of course, the object code
              itself.


19.6         Interprocedural Register Allocation
              Another interprocedural optimization that can be a source of significant perfor­
              mance improvement is interprocedural register allocation. In this section, we de­
              scribe one approach, developed by Wall [Wall86], in detail and outline three others.
              The approaches differ in that Wall’s is done at link time, while the others are done
              during compilation.

19.6.1       Interprocedural Register Allocation at Link Time
              Wall devised an approach to doing interprocedural register allocation at link time
              that combines two observations that enable the interprocedural allocation and the
              optional use of graph coloring for allocation within procedure bodies. We provide
              here an overview of the approach and indications of some refinements that make it
              practical.
                   The first of the two motivating observations is that if the generated code is
              complete, in the sense that it does not require register allocation to run correctly,
              then annotations to drive optional register allocation at link time can be encoded
              like relocation information in an object module and can either be used to drive the
              modification of the code, or be ignored.
                   The second observation is that if two paths in a program’s call graph do not
              intersect, then the same registers can be freely allocated in the procedures in each
              path. The latter observation can be illustrated by considering the call graph in
              Figure 19.40, where each box represents a procedure and the arrows represent calls.




                                 s
 FIG. 19.40 An example call graph for interprocedural register allocation.
660                 Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


                    r l <- y               rmv.y
                    r2 <- z                rmv.z                                       r2       z
                    r3 <- r l + r2         o p l.y op2.z r e s .x                      r l4         r6 + r2
                    x <- r3                rmv.x
                    (a)                                                               (b)
 F I G . 1 9 .4 1   (a) E x a m p le lir c o d e seq uen ce a n d a sso c ia te d a n n o ta tio n s, an d (b) the result o f
                    a llo c a tin g x an d y to reg isters.



                    r l <- a                        lod. a
                    r2 <- r l + 1                   re s. a
                    a <- r2                         s to . a
                    r3 <- b                         rmv.b
                    r4 <- r2 + r3                   op2.b
                    y     r4                        s to .x
                    x <- r4                         rmv.x
 F IG . 1 9 .4 2    A n n o tate d lir co d e fo r the C statem en t x = y = a++ - b.



                    Neither of procedures c and d calls the other, so they can use the same registers
                    without interfering with each other. Similarly, the chain that consists of e, f , and
                    g does not interfere with the subtree consisting of b, c, and d, so the same registers
                    may be used in the chain and in the tree without causing any conflicts. The approach
                    to register allocation described here is based on this second observation combined
                    with some (independently chosen) method of intraprocedural register allocation.
                         The annotations that guide register allocation consist of pairs, each of whose
                    first element is one of six operators, namely, rmv, opl, op2, re s, lod, and sto , and
                    whose second element is a reference to one of the operands of the instruction with
                    which it is associated.
                          As a first example of the annotations, consider the lir code in Figure 19.41(a),
                    where x, y, and z represent storage locations. The meaning of rmv.i/ is that if
                    variable v is allocated to a register at link time, then this instruction should be
                    removed. The meaning of o p l.i/, op2.i/, and r e s .i; is that if v is allocated to a
                    register, then the corresponding position in the instruction should be replaced by
                    the number of the register to which it is allocated. Thus, if we were to succeed in
                    allocating x and y to registers r6 and r l4 , respectively, the code sequence would
                    become the one shown in Figure 19.41(b). The lod operator is used for a variable
                    that is loaded and that will be modified in this basic block before the loaded value is
                    last used, and the sto operator is used for values that will be used after the current
                    use. Thus, for example, the C statement
                          x = y = a++ - b

                    would result in the annotated code shown in Figure 19.42. If we allocate a to a
                    register, we need to replace the first instruction with a register-to-register copy; if we
                    allocate y to a register, we need to replace the store to y with another copy.
     Section 19.6    Interprocedural Register Allocation                                 661

          Of course, if we remove instructions, we also need to fix addresses and offsets
     that refer to the instruction sequence, but the necessary information to do this is
     already available in the instructions themselves and their relocation information.
         Wall’s approach to generating the annotations is to produce triples as the inter­
     mediate code (see Section 4.9.1) and then, in a backward pass over each basic block,
     to mark

1.   the operands v that may be used again after their associated variables are stored to
     (i.e., those that require lod.i/, rather than rmv.i/),
2.   the operands that are stored to and that may be used again (those that require s t o . v,
     rather than rmv.t/), and
3.   the remaining operands, which can be annotated with o p l.i/, op2.i/, re s.i/, or
     rmv. v.

     He then generates the object module and records a list of the procedures in the mod­
     ule, and for each procedure, a list of its local variables, the variables it references,
     and the procedures it calls, along with estimates (or profiling data) of the number of
     times each variable is referenced and the number of calls to each procedure.
          The interprocedural register allocator is invoked near the beginning of the link­
     ing process, once it has been determined which modules need to be linked. It builds
     a call graph with a single node for each procedure and collects the usage information
     for procedures and variables. The call graph is required to be a DAG; this is one of
     the areas where special handling is required, because it may not represent the pro­
     gram accurately. In particular, recursive calls and indirect calls through procedure­
     valued variables cannot be handled in the same way as other calls. Recursive calls
     would make the call graph not be a DAG if they were represented accurately, and
     they would reuse the same registers as already active calls to the same routine if they
     had registers allocated in the same manner as other routines. Similarly, calls through
     a procedure-valued variable might be to any of several possible targets, which may
     not even be knowable accurately at link time.
          After estimating the total number of calls to each routine, the allocator traverses
     the DAG in reverse depth-first order, forming groups of variables that will each be
     assigned to a register, if possible. It groups global variables into singletons and forms
     groups of local variables that cannot be simultaneously live, associating a reference
     frequency with each. The allocator then sorts the groups by frequency and, assuming
     that there are R registers available for allocation, it assigns the top R groups to
     registers (or, alternatively, it can use a graph-coloring allocator within a procedure
     body). Finally, it rewrites the object code, taking the allocation information and
     annotations into account.
          Several issues require special handling or can be improved by specific techniques,
     as follows:1

1.   Initialized globals that are allocated to registers need to have load instructions
     inserted in the code to set their values.
662           Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


         2.   Recursive and indirect calls could either use a standard calling sequence or, for
              recursive calls, could use a special calling sequence that saves and restores exactly
              those registers that need to be.
         3.   Passing arguments in registers instead of in the memory stack can be accommodated
              by adding annotations of the form p a r .proc.v to the instructions that store the
              parameters’ values in the run-time stack, to indicate the procedure proc being called
              and the variable v being passed.
         4.   Profiling can be used to replace the estimated reference frequencies with numbers
              that more directly reflect the actual execution characteristics of the program, and
              thus can improve the register allocation.
         5.   Graph coloring can be used to improve the liveness information that is used in
              allotting variables to groups. This allows some local variables to be combined into
              allocation groups more effectively.


19.6.2        Compile-Time Interprocedural Register Allocation
              Three approaches to interprocedural register allocation at compile time have been
              discussed in the literature and incorporated into compilers.
                    One, developed by Santhanam and Odnert [SanO90], extends register alloca­
              tion by graph coloring (see Section 16.3) by doing an interprocedural live variables
              computation to determine webs for global variables. It partitions the call graph into
              webs, one for each global variable, and allocates the ones with high usage frequen­
              cies to registers, leaving the remaining registers for intraprocedural allocation.
                    Another method, developed by Chow [Chow88], has been implemented as an
              extension to register allocation by priority-based graph coloring (see Section 16.4).
              Its primary goal is to minimize the overhead of register saving and restoring for
              procedure calls and it does so by a combination of shrink wrapping (described in
              Section 15.4.2) and a postorder traversal of the call graph that takes register usage
              by called procedures into account at call sites. Since the caller and callee are both
              visible for most calls, this method can pass a parameter in any register. It assumes
              that all registers are caller-saved and delays register saving and restoring to as far up
              the call graph as possible.
                   The third approach, developed by Steenkiste and Hennessy [SteH89], allocates
              registers by a method similar to Wall’s but at compile time. It is designed for lan­
              guages like lisp in which programs typically consist of many small procedures,
              making interprocedural register allocation particularly important. It does a depth-
              first traversal of the call graph, insofar as it is known, and allocates registers from
              the bottom up using the principle that procedures in different subtrees of the call
              graph can share the same registers, and using at each call site the available infor­
              mation about the register usage of the callee. This approach is likely to run out of
              registers at some point in the process, so the allocator simply switches to a standard
              intraprocedural allocator with saves on entry and restores on exit; the same method
              is used for recursive calls.
          Section 19.8       Other Issues in Interprocedural Program Management                           663

19.7      Aggregation o f Global References
          Another interprocedural optimization that can be applied during linking is aggre­
          gation of global references. Since Rise architectures lack a way to specify a 32-bit
          address in a single instruction, it often takes two instructions to reference a datum
          at an arbitrary address, e.g., a global variable.8 Aggregation o f global references can
          provide a way to significantly reduce this overhead by amortizing it over multiple
          references. For ciscs, this allows shorter offsets to be used and so reduces the size of
          the object code.
               The technique is simple—it essentially requires collecting the global data into
          an area that can be referenced by short offsets from a value stored in a register.
          To perform the aggregation, we must reserve a register (or possibly more than
          one) during compilation that is generally referred to as the global pointer or gp
          (see Section 5.7). We scan the complete object module, looking for the pattern of
          instructions that represents an access to a global variable. For a 32-bit Rise system,
          this involves a l u i for m ips , a s e th i for sparc , and so on, followed by an instruction
          that does a load or store using the register set by the lu i , s e th i, etc. We collect the
          data items that are loaded or stored (possibly with initializations) and we modify
          the addresses that are used in the loads and stores to refer to offsets from the
          global pointer. In the process, we eliminate the additional instructions that compute
          the high-order parts of the addresses and we rewrite the remaining instructions as
          necessary to fix up branch offsets and any other things that may have been changed
          by the instruction removal. The process for ciscs is similar.
               One refinement to global-reference aggregation is to sort the collected global
          data by size, smallest first, so as to maximize the number of items that can be
          referenced from the global pointer(s).


19.8      Other Issues in Interprocedural Program
          Management
          Compilation in a programming environment that manages interprocedural relation­
          ships (often called “ programming in the large” ) leads to a series of issues in opti­
          mization, as discussed above, as well as in other areas. While none of the latter are
          particularly difficult, they do require attention. Some of them have been discussed
          in the literature, while others have only been addressed in experimental or practical
          programming environments. Some of the more important ones are as follows:

       1. name scoping: determining which modules are affected by changing the name of a
          global variable and what effects the change has on them, such as requiring recompi­
          lation;


           8. The problem is more severe for 64-bit Rise architectures, for which four or five instructions may
           be required for the same task.
664         Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization


       2.   recompilation: determining when a change to a module requires recompilation and
            the minimal set of modules that need to be recompiled (see [C 0 0 K 8 6 ]); and
       3.   linkage between routines in the same module (or library) and linkage with shared
            objects: determining when a shared object has been recompiled and what effects it
            has on modules that use it; we discuss some aspects of this issue in Section 5.7.

            Hall provides an exploration of some of these topics and others in her Ph.D. thesis
            [Hall91].



19.9        Wrap-Up
            In this chapter, we have discussed interprocedural control-flow, data-flow, and alias
            analyses and applications of interprocedural information to both global and inter­
            procedural optimization. We began with the studies by Richardson and Ganapathi
            that suggest that interprocedural analysis may not be worth the effort, and then we
            concentrated on the needed analytic tools and on areas where it generally is worth­
            while.
                 We have seen that constructing the call graph of a program is an easy exercise if a
            whole program in a relatively unsophisticated language (e.g., Fortran) is presented at
            once, somewhat harder with separate compilation, and PSPACE-hard for programs
            with both procedure-valued variables and recursion, such as PL/I or C.
                 We have distinguished may and must information, and flow-sensitive and flow-
            insensitive information, and have seen that the flow-sensitive and must information
            may be very expensive to compute precisely, being generally NP- or co-NP-complete.
            Thus, we have concentrated on flow-insensitive may data-flow problems, such as
            M O D , and some of the less expensive flow-insensitive must problems, such as
            interprocedural constant propagation, that are useful in tailoring procedures to take
            account of constant-valued parameters and guiding procedure integration.
                 We have also discussed several varieties of interprocedural optimization, concen­
            trating on interprocedural register allocation and aggregation of global references,
            both of which are performed at link time. Srivastava and Wall’s work has shown
            that it is quite possible that many of the standard optimizations may be performed
            at link time as well.
                 Among the interprocedural optimizations, for most programs, interprocedural
            register allocation and constant propagation are the more important and aggregation
            of global references is less so. However, much of the benefit of interprocedural ana­
            lysis is its contribution to improving the quality of the intraprocedural optimizations
            by narrowing the scope of possible effects of called procedures.
                 Finally, we have suggested that interprocedural optimization is most appropriate
            in a programming environment that manages “ programming in the large” issues—
            such as scoping, recompilation, and shared-object linkage—automatically.
                 We place the interprocedural optimizations in the order for performing opti­
            mizations as shown in Figure 19.43. We add interprocedural constant propagation
              Section 19.9       Wrap-Up                                                                         665




FIG . 19.43   Order o f optim izations, with interprocedural optim izations shown in bold type.
              (continued)




              (preceded by an in trap roced u ral p a ss o f the sam e op tim ization ) an d p roced u re sp e ­
              cialization an d clon in g to block B. C learly, w e d o the su b seq u en t p a ss o f sp arse
              con dition al con stan t p ro p a g a tio n only if in terprocedu ral co n stan t p ro p a g a tio n has
              p rod u ced useful results.
                   We place in terprocedural register allo catio n an d global-reference aggregatio n in
              block E. T hey are best done on the lo ad m odu le, w hen the cod e o f all (statically
              available) p roced u res is present to be w ork ed on.
666           Interprocedural Analysis and O ptim ization




 FIG. 19.43   (continued)




19.10         Further Reading
              Richardson and Ganapathi’s studies of the effectiveness of interprocedural optimiza­
              tion are in [RicG89a], [RicG89b], and [Rich91]. The evidence that interprocedural
              optimization may be more useful for parallelizing compilers is found in [A11C86]
              and [Call 8 8 ].
                   WeihPs proof that constructing the call graph of a recursive program with
              procedure variables is PSPACE-hard is found in [Weih80]. Some of the harder
              issues in computing procedural side effects are discussed in [Weih80], while others
              are addressed only in implemented systems, such as ParaFrase [Kuck74] and Para-
              Scope [CooH 93].
                   Cooper and Kennedy’s original approach to computing flow-insensitive side
              effects is [CooK84]. However, that approach had a significant flaw, as noted in
              [CooK 8 8 a], in that it asserted that the global-variable and formal-parameter sub­
              problems could be solved independently. In fact, the formal-parameter problem must
              Section 19.11    Exercises                                                         667

              be solved before dealing with nonlocal variables, an approach that is presented
              in [CooK 8 8 b]. Myers’s approach to computing flow-sensitive side effects is described
              in [Myer81] and Callahan’s approach is in [Call8 8 ].
                   Callahan, Cooper, Kennedy, and Torczon’s method for performing interproce­
              dural constant propagation is in [CalC 8 6 ]. Grove and Torczon’s discussion of jump
              and return-jump functions, their computational costs, and the information they pro­
              vide is in [GroT93].
                   Cooper and Kennedy’s approach to interprocedural alias analysis is found
              in [CooK89]. A more powerful approach is described in [Deut94].
                   Wall’s approach to interprocedural register allocation at link time is described
              in [Wall8 6 ]. The approaches described for doing interprocedural register alloca­
              tion during compilation were developed by Santhanam and Odnert [SanO90],
              Chow [Chow 8 8 ], and Steenkiste and Hennessy [SteH89].
                   Aggregation of global references is discussed in [HimC87], [Hime91], and
              [SriW94]. [SriW94] discusses, among other things, the extension of this technique
              to 64-bit Rise architectures.
                   Srivastava and Wall’s work on link-time optimization is presented in [SriW93].
                   Some of the issues in interprocedural program management or “ programming
              in the large” are discussed in the literature, e.g., Cooper, Kennedy, and Torczon’s
              paper [C 0 0 K 8 6 ] and Hall’s [Hall91], while others are addressed only in implemented
              systems, such as ParaFrase and ParaScope.



19.11         Exercises
        19.1 (a) Write a program that includes at least five distinct procedures with calls among
             them and that includes at least one recursive call, (b) Show the steps of executing the
             procedure Build_Call_G raph( ) in Figure 19.3 for your example.

RSCH 19.2 The complexity of computing GMOD by the procedures Compute_GMOD( ) and
          GMOD_Search( ) in Figure 19.18 can be reduced by a factor of d (the depth of
          procedure nesting in the program) by applying the observation that LowLink(p) for
          iteration i is less than or equal to LowLink(p) for iteration 1 + 1. Write the resulting
          code for the two procedures.

        19.3 (a) Adapt the approach to computing DMOD given in Section 19.2.1 to computing
             DREF and (b) apply it to the program in Figure 19.10.

        19.4 (a) Formulate an i c a n algorithm to do call-site-specific interprocedural constant-
             propagation analysis using both jump and return-jump functions and (b) apply it
             to the program in Figure 19.44 with h a l t ( ) defined as a routine that terminates
             execution of the program.

        19.5 (a) Construct a C program with at least three routines and at least one global variable
             and (b) perform site-specific alias analysis on it as described in Section 19.4.2.
668           In terprocedu ral A n alysis and O ptim ization


                       procedure main( )
              main     begin
               1            read(t)
               2            call f(t)
               3            call f(2)
                       end
                       procedure f(b)
              f        begin
                  1        print(g(b,l))
                       end
                       procedure g(x,y)
              g        begin
                  1         if y > 0 then
                  2            call h(x,y,l)
                  3             x : —2
               4            else
               5               call h(3,y,1)
               6               halt( )
               7            fi
                       end
                       procedure h(u,v,w)
              h        begin
               1           if u > w then
               2              call g(v,-l)
               3           else
               4              return w + 1
               5           fi
                       end

 FIG. 19.44   Example program on which to run site-specific interprocedural constant propagation.


       19.6   Write an ican routine that takes a lir procedure body and annotates its instructions
              with register-allocation annotations o f the sort discussed in Section 19.6.1.
                                                               CHAPTER 20




                     Optimization for the
                      Memory Hierarchy




T
         his chapter concerns code optimization techniques that can be used to take
         best advantage of the memory hierarchy, particularly data and instruction
         caches, and includes a way to improve register allocation for array elements.
         From the very beginning of the design of computers, almost all systems have
distinguished between main memory and registers. M ain memory has been larger
and slower to fetch from and store to than the register set and, in many systems,
operations other than loads and stores have required at least one operand, if not all,
to be in a register. In Rise systems, of course, this approach has been taken to its
extreme, requiring that all operations other than loads and stores be performed on
operands in registers (or immediates) and that they place their results in registers.
     Over time, the difference between the basic processor cycle and the time needed
to access main memory has increased to the point where it would now be a source
of significant performance degradation if all loads and stores were required to run
at the speed of main memory. And the disparity is getting worse: main memory
speeds are increasing at 10% to 20% a year, while processor speeds are achieving
increases of as much as 50% a year. To remedy this, cache memories, or simply
caches, have been designed to fit between the registers and main memory to reduce
the speed mismatch. They duplicate selected portions of main memory, usually on
demand, in a way determined by the hardware or a combination of hardware and
software. A load, store, or instruction fetch directed to an address represented in
a cache is satisfied by the cache rather than by main memory (or, in the case of
a store, possibly in parallel with memory) and with a result latency that is ideally
not more than two processor cycles. For systems with exposed or partially exposed
pipelines (e.g., Rises and advanced implementations of the Intel 386 architecture
family), loads and branches often require two cycles to complete, but the second
cycle is usually available to execute another instruction (in the case of a load, the
instruction needs to be one that does not use the quantity being loaded).

                                                                              669
670    Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


            Caches depend on the spatial and temporal locality properties of programs for
       their effectiveness. If a program executes a loop repeatedly, then, ideally, the first
       iteration brings the code for it into the cache and subsequent iterations execute it
       from the cache, rather than requiring it to be reloaded from memory each time.
       Thus, the first iteration may incur overhead for fetching the instructions into the
       cache, but subsequent iterations generally need not. Similarly, if a block of data is
       used repeatedly, it is ideally fetched into the cache and accessed from there, again
       incurring the overhead of reading it from main memory only on its first use. On
       the other hand, if the code and data interfere in the cache, i.e., if they occupy some
       of the same cache locations, or if the data interferes with itself by having sections
       mapped to the same cache blocks, significant performance degradation may result.
       At the worst, loads, stores, and instruction fetches are no faster than accessing main
       memory.
            A system may have separate data and instruction caches (also called D-caches
       and I-caches, respectively) or it may have a combined or unified cache that holds
       both data and instructions. Also, systems with paging invariably include another
       kind of cache, namely, a translation-lookaside buffer; or TLB, that is used to cache
       information about the translation of virtual memory addresses to physical addresses
       and vice versa.
            This chapter begins with a section of anecdotes that graphically describe the
       impact and possibilities of cache usage and optimization. This is followed by a se­
       ries of sections that describe instruction prefetching and intra- and interprocedural
       approaches to instruction-cache optimization. Next comes a section on taking ad­
       vantage of register allocation for array elements, followed by a series of sections
       that give an introduction to and overview of data-cache optimization. Finally, we
       discuss the interaction of scalar and memory-oriented optimizations and the integra­
       tion of memory-related optimizations into the structure of an aggressive optimizing
       compiler.


20.1   Impact o f Data and Instruction Caches
       Bell reports on the effect of tuning numerically intensive Fortran and C programs
       by hand to take better advantage of the IBM RS/6000’s pipelines and caches. He
       examines how performance varies with the stride or sequential difference in indexes
       with which arrays are accessed. With 64-byte blocks in the D-cache, eight double­
       precision floating-point values fit into a block, so D-cache performance is directly
       tied to the strides used. In particular, his data show that performance decreases as
       the logarithm of the increase of the stride for stride values < 32. For strides larger
       than 32, TLB misses begin to dominate the performance degradation—when the
       stride is 4,096 or greater, there is a TLB miss for every memory reference, resulting
       in a performance of less than 3% of the maximum possible.
            Thus, arranging arrays in memory so that they can be accessed with the smallest
       possible strides is generally key to achieving high data-cache performance. One way
       to achieve this for code that will use an array several times is to copy the items
       that will be used to consecutive locations in another array, so that the data can be
            Section 20.1      Impact of D ata and Instruction Caches                             671


            do i = 1,N                                            do i = 1,N
              do j = 1,N                                            do j = 1,N
                do k = 1,N                                            do k = 1,N
                  C(i,j) = C(i,j)                                       C(i,j) = C(i,j)
                      + A(i,k) * B(k,j)                                     + A(k,i) * B(k,j)
                enddo                                                 enddo
              enddo                                                 enddo
            enddo                                                 enddo

            (a) MM                                         (b) M M T

            do j = l,N,t                                          do j = l,N,t
              do k = l,N,t                                         do k = l,N,t
                do i = 1,N                                          do i = 1,N
                   do jj = j,min(j+t-l,N)                             do jj = j,min(j+t-l,N)
                     do kk = k,min(k+t-l,N)                            do kk = k,min(k+t-l,N)
                       C(i»jj) = C(i,jj)                                   C(i»jj) - C(i,jj)
                           + A(i,kk) * B(kk,jj)                               + A(kk,i) * B(kk,jj)
                      enddo                                             enddo
                    enddo                                             enddo
                enddo                                               enddo
              enddo                                                enddo
            enddo                                                 enddo

            (c) MMB                                        (d) MMBT
FIG. 20.1 Four versions of matrix multiplication in Fortran: (a) MM, the usual form; (b) MMT,
          with A transposed; (c) MMB, with the j and k loops tiled; and (d) MMBT, with both
          transposing and tiling.


            accessed with stride one, and then to copy the data back if the entries have been
            changed in the process.
                As an example of the potential impact of D-cache optimization, consider the
            four versions of double-precision matrix multiplication in Fortran described by Bell.
            The four versions (shown in Figure 20.1) are as follows:

       1.   MM: the standard textbook triply nested loop to multiply A by B;
       2.   MMT: MM with A transposed in memory;
       3.   MMB: the result of tiling (see Section 20.4.3) all three loops with tiles of size t ; and
       4.   MMBT: the result of combining tiling and transposition of A.

            Bell reports measured performance numbers for each of these versions with N = 50
            on an IBM RS/6000 Model 530. The performance of the original version varies with
            the organization and size of the matrices by a factor of over 14, while tiling and
            transposing produce performance that is nearly maximal and that is even across the
            entire range of sizes. The intermediate versions perform nearly as well.
672      Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


              As examples of the potential effect of I-caches on performance, we offer two
         anecdotes. The first concerns compiling Linpack for a system with 32-byte cache
         blocks and a processor capable of fetching four 4-byte instructions per cycle and
         issuing three. The first instruction of the saxpy loop that is the heart of the program
         turns out to fall at the end of a cache block, so the instruction buffer1 can fetch only
         that one useful instruction, and only it is executed in the first cycle of the loop body’s
         execution; this pattern, of course, continues to be the case in every iteration of the
         loop.
              The second concerns the spec gcc benchmark, which frequently encounters a
         relatively high percentage of stall cycles (about 10%) due to I-cache misses, if it is
         not optimized for I-cache usage. The primary issue is cache capacity—gcc has a large
         working set—but this can be improved by using the methods discussed below that
         separate frequently executed code from rarely executed code within each procedure
         body.


20.2     Instruction-Cache Optimization
         The following sections describe several approaches to improving instruction-cache
         hit rates. Two of the approaches are interprocedural, one is intraprocedural, and the
         other three have both intra- and interprocedural aspects. All attempt to rearrange
         code so as to reduce the size of the working set and reduce conflicts.

20.2.1   Using Hardware Assists: Instruction Prefetching
         In many implementations of a variety of architectures, the hardware provides se­
         quential prefetching of code and, in some cases, the possibility of fetching from the
         branch-taken path in addition to the fall-through path.
              Some of the newer 64-bit Rises, such as sparc-V9 and Alpha, provide software
         support for instruction prefetching. This allows the programmer or compiler the
         opportunity to provide prefetching hints to a system’s I-cache and instruction-fetch
         unit, by indicating that a block or group of blocks is likely to be needed soon, so
         it should be fetched into the cache when there are free bus cycles. For example, for
         sparc -V9, one issues the pseudo-instruction

             ip r e fe tc h   address
         to prefetch the code block containing the given address.
              Software prefetching is useful mostly for code blocks that are about to be fetched
         for the first time, or for blocks that are used repeatedly and are determined by pro­
         filing to be likely not to be in the I-cache when they are needed. In the first case, the
         usefulness of prefetch instructions depends on the absence of hardware support for
         sequential and branch prefetching. Upon determining that a block is likely to benefit
         from software prefetching, one then places the appropriate instruction Tpref cycles

         1. An in struction b u ffer is a hardware queue of instructions in transit from the cache to the
         execution unit.
         Section 20.2    Instruction-Cache Optimization                                     673


         backward in the code from the point at which the block would begin executing,
         where Tpref is the time needed to satisfy the prefetch. If whether a block is needed or
         not depends on a condition determined t cycles before the block would begin exe­
         cuting, then one places the prefetch min(Tpref, t) cycles back in the code on the path
         that needs it.
             Optimization of branch prediction, which can enhance the effectiveness of in­
         struction prefetching, is discussed in Section 18.11.

20.2.2   Procedure Sorting
         The easiest I-cache optimization technique to apply and one that can have definite
         benefit is to sort the statically linked routines that make up an object module at
         link time according to their calling relationships and frequency of use. The goal of
         the sorting is to place routines near their callers in virtual memory so as to reduce
         paging traffic and to place frequently used and related routines so they are less likely
         to collide with each other in the I-cache. This approach is based on the premise
         that routines and their callers are likely to be temporally close to each other and
         hence should be placed so that they do not interfere spatially. If profiling feedback
         is available, it should be taken into account in this process; if not, it can be guided
         by heuristics that place routines that call each other frequently closer to each other
         (e.g., calls from inside loops should be weighted more heavily than calls that are not
         embedded in loops).
               To implement this idea, we begin with an undirected static call graph, with each
         arc labeled with the number of times that each of the two procedures at either end
         of it calls the other one. We use an undirected call graph because there may be calls
         in both directions between two procedures and because each call is matched by the
         corresponding return. Then we collapse the graph in stages, at each stage selecting
         an arc with the highest weight and merging the nodes it connects into a single one,
         coalescing their corresponding arcs and adding the weights of the coalesced arcs to
         compute the label for the coalesced arc. Nodes that are merged are placed next to
         each other in the final ordering of the procedures, with the weights of the connections
         in the original graph used to determine their relative order.
               The ican algorithm for this process is the routine P ro c_ P o sitio n ( ) given
         in Figure 20.2. We assume that the call graph is connected; if not, i.e., if some
         procedures are unused, we apply the algorithm only to the (at most one) connected
         component that contains the root node.
               A two-element member of ProcSeq, such as                     represents a binary
         tree with an unlabeled root. We also use longer elements of ProcSeq, such as
          [tfi,. . . ,<z«], to represent sequences of n elements. If there is no arc connecting
         nodes p i and p2, we define w eight( [ p i ,p 2 ] ) = 0. The functions l e f t ( £ ) and
         r ig h t (t) return the left and right subtrees, respectively, of tree t. The functions
         leftm o st (t) and rightm ost (£) return, respectively, the leftmost and rightmost
         leaves of the tree t. The function maxi (s) returns the index i of the first element
         of the sequence s with maximal value, and the function re v e rse (s) reverses the
         sequence s and all its subsequences. For example, m axi( [ 3 , 7 , 4 , 5 , 7 ] ) = 2 and
         r e v e r se ( [ 1 , [ 2 , 3 ] ] ) = [ [ 3 , 2 ] , ! ] .
674           Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


              ProcSeq = Procedure u sequence of ProcSeq

              procedure Proc_Position(E,weight) returns sequence of Procedure
                 E: in set of (Procedure x Procedure)
                 weight: in (Procedure x Procedure) — > integer
              begin
                 T, A := 0: set of ProcSeq
                 e : Procedure x Procedure
                 a, emax: ProcSeq
                 psweight: ProcSeq — > integer
                 max: integer
                 for each e e E do
                     T := A u= { [e @ l,e@ 2]}
                     p s w e ig h t ( [e @ l,e @ 2 ])   w e ig h t(e @ l,e @ 2 )
                 od
                 repeat
                    max := 0
                    for each a e A do
                        if psweight(a) > max then
                           emax := a
                           max := psweight(a)
                        fi
                    od
                    Coalesce.Nodes(T,A ,weight,psweight,emaxll,emax!2)
                 until A = 0
                 return Flatten(VT)
              end     || Proc_Position

  FIG. 20.2 Procedure-sorting algorithm.




                  The function C oalesce_N odes(T ,i4 ,weight,psw eight,pl yp2) given in Figure
              20.3 coalesces the nodes p i and p2 into a single node, adjusting the values of T, A,
              and psweight in the process. Since we are using two-element sequences to represent
              unordered pairs whose elements may themselves be unordered pairs, we need several
              routines to perform functions that would be trivial when applied to ordered pairs.
              These functions are as follows:1


         1.   Same ( p i , p i) returns tru e if p i and p i are identical sequences up to order, and
              f a l s e otherwise; for example, S am e ([l, [2 ,3 ]] , [ [3,2] , 1]) returns tru e, while
              Same ( [1, [2,3] ] , [ [1 ,2 ] , 3] ) does not.
         2.   Member (A , [ p l,p 2 ] ) returns tru e if Ipl ,p21 is a member of the set A modulo
              order, and f a l s e otherwise.
         3.   Remove {A , s ) , given in Figure 20.4, removes from A any of its members that Same ( )
              does not distinguish from s, and returns the result.
            Section 20.2          Instruction-Cache Optimization                               675


            procedure Coalesce_Nodes(T,A ,origwt,psweight,pi,p2)
               f, A: inout set of ProcSeq
               origwt: in ProcSeq — > integer
               psweight: inout ProcSeq — > integer
               pi, p2: in ProcSeq
            begin
               lpl, rpl, lp2, rp2: Procedure
               p, padd: ProcSeq
               i : integer
               II select ProcSeqs to make adjacent and reverse one if
               I| necessary to get best order
               lpl     leftmost(pi)
               rpl := rightmost(pi)
               lp2 := leftmost(p2)
               rp2 := rightmost(p2)
               i := maxi([origwt(rpl,lp2),origwt(rp2,lpl),
                   origwt(lpl,lp2),origwt(rpl,rp2)])
               II form new ProcSeq and adjust weights
               case i of
            1:     padd := [pi ,p2]
            2:     padd := [p2,pl]
            3:     padd := [pi,reverse(p2)]
            4:     padd := [reverse(pi),p2]
                  esac
                  T := (T u {padd}) - {pl,p 2>
                  A := Remove(A, [pi,p2])
                  for each p e T (p * padd) do
                     psweight([p,padd]) := 0
                     if Member(A, [p,pi]) then
                        A := Remove(A, [p,pi])
                        psweight([p,padd]) +- psweight([p,pi])
                     if Member(A,[p,p2]) then
                        A := Remove(A, [p,p2])
                        psweight([p,padd]) += psweight([p,p2])
                     fi
                       A u= {[p ,p ad d ]}
                  od
            end          || Coalesce_Nodes
FIG. 20.3 Node-coalescing procedure used in Figure 20.2.




       4.   F la t t e n ( T ) , given in Figure 20.4, traverses the binary tree represented by the
            sequence T from left to right, and flattens it, i.e., it constructs the sequence of its
            leaf nodes, which it returns.


                As an example of the procedure-sorting algorithm, assume that we begin with
            the weighted undirected call graph in Figure 20.5(a). In the first step, we coalesce P2
676           Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


              procedure Flatten(t) returns sequence of Procedure
                 t: in ProcSeq
              begin
                 if leaf(t) then
                    return [t]
                 else
                    return Flatten(left(t)) ® Flatten(right(t))
                 fi
              end II Flatten

              procedure Remove(A,s) returns Procseq
                 A: in set of ProcSeq
                  s: in ProcSeq
              begin
                 t : ProcSeq
                 for each t e T do
                     if Same(s,t) then
                        A -= {s}
                        return A
                     fi
                 od
                 return A
              end     II Remove

  FIG. 20.4 Auxiliary procedures used in the procedure-sorting algorithm.


              and P4 to form [P2,P4] and we get the graph shown in Figure 20.5(b). In the next
              step, we coalesce P3 and P6 to form [P3,P6], and then P5 and [P2,P4] to form
              [P5, [P 2,P 4]], resulting in the graphs shown in Figure 20.5(c) and (d), respectively.
              The contents of the single node resulting from the coalescing process is

                  [[P I, [ P 3 , P 6 ] , [ P 5 , [ P 2 , P 4 ] ] ] , [ P 7 , P 8 ] ]

              so we arrange the procedures in memory in the order PI, P3, P6, P5, P2, P4, P7, P8.
              Note that P2 and P4 have been placed next to each other, as have P3 and P6, and P5
              and P2.


20.2.3        Procedure and Block Placement
             Another approach to I-cache optimization that can be combined with the one de­
             scribed above requires modifying the system linker to put each routine on an I-cache
             block boundary, allowing the later phases of the compilation process to position fre­
             quently executed code segments, such as loops, so as to occupy the smallest possible
             number of cache blocks and to place them at or near the beginnings of blocks, thus
             helping to minimize I-cache misses and making it more likely that superscalar CPUs
             can fetch whole instruction groups that can be executed simultaneously. If most ba­
             sic blocks are short (say, four to eight instructions), this helps to keep the beginnings
             of basic blocks away from the ends of cache blocks. A compiler can be instrumented
              Section 20.2   Instruction-Cache Optimization                                    677




  FIG. 20.5 (a) An example flowgraph for procedure sorting, and (b) through (d) the first three
            transformations of the flowgraph.


             to collect statistics on this without much difficulty, and profiling feedback could be
             used to determine for what basic blocks such placement is important vs. those for
             which it simply wastes code space and results in extra branches.


20.2.4       Intraprocedural Code Positioning
             Pettis and Hansen [PetH90] developed and evaluated a bottom-up approach to in­
             traprocedural code positioning, which we describe. The objective is to move infre­
             quently executed code (such as error handling) out of the main body of the code and
             to straighten the code (i.e., to remove unconditional branches and make as many
             conditional branches as possible take the fall-through path) so that, in general, a
             higher fraction of the instructions fetched into the I-cache are actually executed.
678   Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


      Unlike procedure sorting, this process can be done during compilation of each pro­
      cedure. To do this, we assume that the edges in a procedure’s flowgraph have been
      annotated with their execution frequencies, either by profiling or by estimating the
      frequencies. The algorithm performs a bottom-up search of the flowgraph, build­
      ing chains of basic blocks that should be placed as straight-line code because the
      edges between them are executed frequently.2 Initially, each basic block is a chain
      unto itself. Then, in successive steps, the two chains whose respective tail and head
      are connected by the edge with the highest execution frequency are merged; if the
      highest frequency occurs on an edge that does not connect the tail of a chain to the
      head of another, the chains cannot be merged. Nevertheless, such edges are used in
      code placement: we assume that a forward branch is taken;3 this information is pre­
      served so that the target basic block can, if possible, be placed at some point after
      the source block. Finally, basic-block placement is done by first selecting the entry
      chain and then by proceeding through the other chains according to the weights
      of their connections, ican code for the procedure B lo c k _ P o sitio n (£ ,E ,r,/re g ),
      where B is the set of nodes (i.e., basic blocks), E the set of edges, r the entry node,
      and freq{ ) the function that maps edges to their execution frequencies, and the pro­
      cedure Edge_Count( ) that it uses is given in Figure 20.6.
           As an example of the algorithm, consider the flowgraph in Figure 20.7. The edge
      with the highest execution frequency is from B1 to B2, so the first sequence formed
      is [B1 ,B 2 ]. The edge from B2 to B4 has the next highest frequency, so the existing
      sequence is extended to [B1,B2,B4]; similarly, en try and B8 are added in the next
      two steps, resulting in [entry,B1 ,B 2 ,B 4 ,B 8 ]. The next highest frequency edge is
      from B9 to e x it , so a new sequence, [B 9 ,e x it], is started. In subsequent steps,
      the sequence [B 9 ,e x it] is extended to [B 6 ,B 9 ,e x it], and two other sequences are
      constructed, [B3,B7] and [B5]. Next we compute the e d g e s( ) function, as follows:

           edges([entry, B1, B2, B4, B 8] ) = 2
           edges([B3,B7]) = 1
           edges([B5]) = 1
           edges( [B6,B9,exit] ) = 0

      Next, we order the sequences so that the one containing the entry node comes first,
      followed by the other three in an order given by the edges ( ) function, and we
      return the result. The resulting arrangement in memory is shown in Figure 20.8.
           Finally, we fix up the code by inserting and deleting branches as necessary to
      make the flowgraph equivalent in effect to the original one. This is done by using a
      combination of the original block entries, the labels that begin the blocks, and the
      branches that end them. Notice that in our example we have succeeded in making
      all the branches forward, except the two loop-closing ones, and we have arranged
      the blocks so that six of the nine forward edges are fall-throughs.


      2. The chains are somewhat reminiscent of traces in trace scheduling (Section 17.5), except that no
      fix-up code is required.
      3. This aspect of the algorithm can, of course, be modified to correspond to other assumptions
      about conditional branches.
           Section 20.2   Instruction-Cache Optimization                   679


           procedure Block_Position(B,E ,r ,freq)
              returns sequence of Node
              B: in set of Node
              E: in set of (Node x Node)
              r: in Node
              freq: in (Node x Node) — > integer
           begin
              C := 0: set of sequence of Node
              CR: sequence of Node
              c, cl, c2, clast, cfirst, cnew: sequence of Node
              nch, oldnch, max, fr: integer
              edges: (set of sequence of Node) — > integer
              e: Node x Node
              for each b e B do
                 C u- {[b]}
              od
              nch := |CI
              repeat
                 oldnch := nch
                  II select two sequences of nodes that have the
                  I| highest execution frequency on the edge that
                  II connects the tail of one to the head of the
                  I| other
                 max := 0
                 for each cl e C do
                     for each c2 e C do
                        if cl * c2 & (cU-l)->(c2U) e E then
                           fr := freq(cll-l,c211)
                           if fr > max then
                              max := fr
                              clast := cl
                              cfirst := c2
                           fi
                        fi
                     od
                 od
                  I| combine selected pair of sequences
                 if max > 0 then
                     cnew := clast ® cfirst
                     C := (C - {clast,cfirst}) u {cnew}
                     nch -= 1
                 fi
              until nch = oldnch

                                                                    (continued)
FIG. 20.6 Bottom-up basic-block positioning algorithm.
680          Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


                 while C * 0 do
                     I| find sequence beginning with entry node and
                    II concatenate sequences so as to make as many
                    II branches forward as possible
                    CR := ♦C
                    if r = CR11 then
                        C -= {CR}
                        for each cl e C do
                           edges(cl) := 0
                           for each c2 e C do
                               if cl * c2 then
                                  edges(cl) += Edge_Count(cl,c2,E)
                               fi
                           od
                        od
                        repeat
                           max := 0
                           for each cl e C do
                               if edges(cl) £ max then
                                  max := edges(cl)
                                  c := cl
                               fi
                           od
                           CR ®= c
                           C — {c}
                        until C = 0
                        return CR
                    fi
                 od
             end      II Block_Position

             procedure Edge_Count(cl,c2,E) returns integer
                 cl, c2: in sequence of Node
                 E: in Node x Node
             begin
                 ct := 0, i, j : integer
                 for i := 1 to Icl I do
                    for j := 1 to |c2| do
                       if (clli)->(c21j) e E then
                           ct += 1
                       fi
                    od
                 od
                 return ct
             end     II Edge_Count

  FIG. 20.6 (continued)
             Section 20.2    Instruction-Cache Optimization                                   681




  FIG. 20.7 An example flowgraph for intraprocedural code positioning.




  FIG. 20.8 The example flowgraph in Figure 20.7 after intraprocedural code positioning.



20.2.5       Procedure Splitting
             A technique that enhances the effectiveness of both the procedure-sorting and the
             intraprocedural code-positioning algorithms is procedure splitting, which divides
             each procedure into a primary and a secondary component, the former containing
             the frequently executed basic blocks and the latter containing the rarely executed
             ones, such as exception-handling code. One then collects the secondary components
             of a series of procedures into a separate secondary section, thus packing the primary
             components more tightly together. Of course, procedure splitting requires adjusting
             the branches between the components. Experimentation should be the basis for
             deciding the execution-frequency boundary between the primary and secondary
             components.
                  A schematic example of procedure splitting is given in Figure 20.9. The regions
             labeled “ p ” and “ s” represent primary and secondary code, respectively.
682          Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


                             PI                          P2                 P3         P4
                                                              i             i
                         p             s                      ! s       p   ! s    p             s
                                  i!                 P        i             i               i
                                                                                            i

                   (a)
                   PI              P2            P3             P4                PI   P2   P3       P4

                   P                   P             P              P

                                           Primary                                      Secondary
             (b)
  FIG. 20.9 (a) A group of procedure bodies, each split into primary (p) and secondary (s)
            components, and (b) the result of collecting each type of component.


20.2.6       Combining Intra- and Interprocedural Methods
             An approach to I-cache optimization that combines intra- and interprocedural meth­
             ods is exemplified by the work of McFarling, who focuses on optimization of entire
             programs for direct-mapped I-caches (see Section 20.7 for references). His method
             works on object modules and depends on rearranging instructions in memory and
             segregating some instructions to not be cached at all. As for the approaches discussed
             above, profiling feedback improves the effectiveness of his algorithm.
                  McFarling has also investigated the impact of procedure integration or inlining
             on I-caches. Clearly, inlining can affect I-cache miss rates both positively and nega­
             tively. If too many procedures are inlined, code size may increase exponentially and
             the I-cache hit rate may suffer as a result; on the other hand, inlining can also in­
             crease locality, thus decreasing the miss rate. He gives a model for determining the
             effect of inlining a single call and criteria for deciding which procedures to inline.


20.3         Scalar Replacement o f Array Elements
             One concern in generating good object code for loops that manipulate subscripted
             variables is that very few compilers even try to allocate such variables to registers,
             despite the fact that register allocation is often done very effectively for scalars.
             Before we launch into the details of a method for doing such allocation, we present
             two examples that show how important it can be.
                  Our first example is the matrix multiplication code given in Figure 20.1(a). If we
             replace the accesses to C (i, j ) by a variable ct, as shown in Figure 20.10, and ct is
             allocated to a register, we reduce the number of memory accesses by 2 • (N3 - N2) or
             nearly a factor of two.
                  Our second example is the code in Figure 20.11(a). The references to b [ ] can be
             replaced by two temporaries, resulting in the code in Figure 20.11(b), reducing the
             Section 20.3     Scalar Replacement of Array Elements                                683
             do i = 1,N
                do j = 1,N
                   ct = C (i, j )
                   do k = 1,N
                       ct = ct + A(i,k) * B (k,j)
                   enddo
                   C( i , j ) = ct
                enddo
             enddo
FIG. 20.10 Fortran matrix multiply from Figure 20.1(a) with a scalar temporary in place of C (i, j ) .


                                                  i f n >= 1 then
                                                        tO <- b[l]
                                                        tl <- tO + 1.0
                                                        b [2] <- tl
                                                     a [l] <- 2 * tO + c[l]
                                                  endif
                                                  tO <- t l
             for i <- 1 to n do                   for i <- 2 to n do
                b [i+l] <- b [i] + 1.0               t l < - tO + 1.0
                a [i] <- 2 * b [i] + c[i]            b [i+ l] <- t l
             endfor                                  a [i] <- 2 * tO + c[i]
                                                     tO <- t l
                                                  endfor
             (a)                                  (b)
FIG. 20.11 (a) A simple hir recurrence, and (b) the result of using scalar temporaries in it.


             number of memory accesses by about 40% . Of course, if n is known to be greater
             than or equal to one, the i f can be deleted.
                  The approach to replacing subscripted variables by scalars, and hence making
             them available for register allocation, is called scalar replacement, also known as
             register pipelining. In essence, this method finds opportunities to reuse array ele­
             ments and replaces the reuses with references to scalar temporaries. As we have seen
             in the examples, it can produce dramatic improvements in speed for some real-life
             programs. Another benefit is that it can decrease the need for D-cache optimization.
                  Scalar replacement is simplest to explain for loop nests that contain no condi­
             tionals. To describe it, we need to define the period of a loop-carried dependence
             edge e in the dependence graph, denoted p(e), as the constant number of loop iter­
             ations between the references to the subscripted variable representing the tail of the
             edge and its head; if the number of iterations is not constant, the variable is not a
             candidate for scalar replacement and the period is undefined.
                  Next, we build a partial dependence graph for the loop nest, including only flow
             and input dependences that have a defined period and are either loop-independent
             or carried by the innermost loop; we exclude edges that represent transitive depen­
             dences. Alternatively, we can begin with the full dependence graph, if we have it,
684           Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


              for i <- 1 to n do                       for j <- 1 to n do
                 for j <- 1 to n do                       for i <- 1 to n do
                     a[i,j] <- b[i] + 0.5                     a[i,j] <- b[i] + 0.5
                     a[i+l,j] <- b[i] - 0.5                   a[i+l,j] <- b[i] - 0.5
                 endfor                                   endfor
              endfor                                   endfor
              (a)                                      (b)
 FIG. 20.12 (a) A doubly nested hir loop, and (b) the result of interchanging the loops.


              and prune it. Each flow or input dependence in the resulting graph represents an
              opportunity for scalar replacement.
                    As our examples suggest, we need p(e) + 1 temporaries in general to hold the
              values generated by p(e) + 1 iterations before the last one can be recycled. So we
              introduce temporaries to through tP(e) and replace references to the array element
              by uses of the temporaries. In particular, the generating reference that fetches the
              array element A [/] from memory is replaced by to <r- A [/], and other references to
              A [/+ /*s], where s is the stride of sequential accesses to A [], are replaced by either
              t j <- A [/+/*s] or A [/+/*s]         £/, depending on whether the reference is a use or a
              definition, respectively. We also place a sequence of assignments tP(e) <- tP(e)-U ♦ • • >
              t\ <r- to at the end of the innermost loop body. Finally, we must initialize the ti
              correctly by peeling4 p{e) iterations of the body from the beginning of the loop
              and replacing the first fetch of the array element in iteration i by the assignment
              t0 <- elem, and other fetches and stores by the corresponding assignments. Now
              each t{ is a candidate for allocation to a register and, further, if the dependence is
              loop-independent, it is a candidate for code motion out of the loop.
                    Our second example of scalar replacement (Figure 20.11) is done according to
              the method described above.
                    Transformations, such as loop interchange and loop fusion (see Section 20.4.2),
              may make scalar replacement applicable to or more effective for a given loop nest.
              Loop interchange may increase opportunities for scalar replacement by making loop-
              carried dependences be carried by the innermost loop. See Figure 20.12 for an
              example.
                    Loop fusion can create opportunities for scalar replacement by bringing together
              in one loop multiple uses of a single array element (or more than one). An example is
              shown in Figure 20.13. After fusing the two loops, scalar replacement can be applied
              to a [ i ] .
                    Scalar replacement can handle loops that have ifs in their bodies, such as the C
              code in Figure 20.14. For this example, we use three temporaries and assign t2 in
              place of a [ i - 2 ] , t l in place of a [ i - l ] , and tO in place of a [ i ] .
                    Further, scalar replacement can be applied to nested loops with significant
              benefit. For example, given the loop in Figure 20.15(a), we first perform scalar


              4. Peeling k iterations from the beginning of a loop means replacing the first k iterations by k
              copies of the body plus the increment and test code for the loop index variable and placing them
              immediately ahead of the loop.
             Section 20.3              Scalar Replacement of Array Elements                                                  685

             f o r i <- 1 t o n do
                  b [ i ] <- a [ i ] + 1.0                                f o r i <- 1 t o n do
             endfor                                                            b [ i ] <- a [ i ] + 1.0
             f o r j <- 1 to n do                                              c [ i ] <- a [ i ] / 2 . 0
                  c [ j ] <- a [ j ] / 2 . 0                              endfor
             endfor
             (a)                                                          (b)
FIG. 20.13   (a ) A p a i r o f h i r l o o p s , a n d (b ) t h e r e s u l t o f f u s i n g t h e m .



                                                                                 t 2 = a[0] ;
                                                                                 t l = a[l] ;
                                                                                 tO = a [2] ;
                                                                                 b [2] = (tO + b [ 2 ] ) / 2 . 0 ;
                                                                                 tO = t 2 + 1 .0 ;
                                                                                 a [2] = tO;
                                                                                 t2 = t l ;
                                                                                 t l = tO;
                                                                                 tO = a [3] ;
                                                                                 b[3] = (tO + b [ 3 ] ) / 2 . 0 ;
                                                                                 tO = t l - 1 .0 ;
                                                                                 a [3] = tO;
                                                                                 t2 = t l ;
                                                                                 t l = tO;
             f o r ( i = 2; i <= 20; i++)                                        f o r ( i = 4; i <= 20; i++)
             { b[i] = (a[i] + b [ i] ) / 2 .0 ;                                  {     tO = a [ i ] ;
                                                                                       b [ i ] = (tO + b [ i ] ) / 2 . 0 ;
                   i f ( ( i /#. 2) == 0)                                              i f ( ( i % 2) == 0)
                       a [ i ] = a [ i - 2 ] + 1 .0 ;                                  { tO = t 2 + 1 .0 ;
                                                                                           a [ i ] = tO;
                                                                                       >
                   else                                                                else
                                                                                       {
                       a [ i ] = a [ i - l ] - 1 .0 ;                                      tO = t l - 1 .0 ;
                                                                                           a [ i ] = tO;
                                                                                       >
                                                                                       t2 = t l ;
                                                                                       t l = tO;
             >                                                                   >
             (a)                                                                  (b)
FIG. 20.14   (a) A C loop with a control-flow construct in its body, and (b) the result of applying
             scalar replacement to a [ ].
686           Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


              f o r i <- 1 to n do
                   x [ i ] <- 0
                   f o r j <- 1 to n do
                         x [i]  x [ i ] + a [ i , j ] * y [ j]
                   endfor
              endfor
              (a)
              f o r i <- 1 to n do
                    to <r- 0
                 fo r j    1 to n do
                     tO <— tO + a [ i , j ]       * y [ j]
                 endfor
                 x [i] <- tO
              endfor
              (b)
 FIG. 20.15 (a) A doubly nested hir loop, and (b) the loop with scalar replacement performed on
            x [i] in the inner loop.


              f o r i <r~ 1 by 3 to n do
                   tO     0
                    11 <— 0
                  t2        0
                  f o r j < - 1to n do
                        tO <- tO + a [ i , j ] *       y [j ]
                        t l <- t l + a [ i + l , j ]   * y [ j]
                        t2 <- t2 + a [ i + 2 , j ]     * y [ j]
                  endfor
                  x [i]       tO
                  x [i+ l]       tl
                  x [i+ 2 ] <- t2
              endfor
              fo r i        i to n do
                  tO        0
                  fo r j      1 to n do
                        tO <- tO + a [ i , j ] *       y [ j]
                  end for
                  x [ i ] <- tO
              end for

 FIG. 20.16 The loop in Figure 20.15(b) with the inner loop unrolled by a factor of three.


              replacement on x [ i] in the inner loop, which results in the code in Figure 20.15(b).
              Next, we unroll the inner loop by an (arbitrarily chosen) factor of three, which re­
              sults in the code in Figure 20.16; then we scalar replace the y [j] values also, which
              yields the code in Figure 20.17.
              Section 20.4         Data-Cache Optimization                                     687

              f o r i <- 1 by 3 to n do
                   tO       0
                   t l <- 0
                   t2 <- 0
                   f o r j <- 1 to n do
                        t4     y[j]
                        tO     tO + a [ i , j ] * t4
                        t l <- t l + a [ i + l , j ] * t4
                        t2 <r- t2 + a [ i + 2 , j ] * t4
                  endfor
                  x [ i ] <- tO
                  x [ i + l ] <- t l
                  x [i+ 2 ]      t2
              endfor
              f o r i <- i to n do
                   tO <- 0
                   fo r j    1 to n do
                       tO     tO + a [ i , j ] * y [ j]
                   endfor
                   x [i] <- tO
              endfor

 FIG. 20.17 The loop in Figure 20.16 with y [j] scalar replaced in the inner loop.




20.4          Data-Cache Optimization
              Almost all of the remainder of this chapter is devoted to an introduction to and
              overview of the optimization of the cache usage of numerical (or scientific) code. By
              numerical code, we mean programs that manipulate large arrays of data, usually,
              but not always, of floating-point values and in Fortran. Most such programs have
              patterns of data usage that are regular in structure and that include opportunities
              for reuse of data before it is flushed from the cache.
                   We begin with a brief discussion of global arrangement of data, which assumes
              that we have an entire program available to analyze and transform, so information
              collected about all parts of the program can be used by the compiler to arrange all
              the arrays used in the program in the load image so as to minimize their interference
              with each other in the D-cache. Next, we give an overview of D-cache optimization
              for individual procedures, which is designed, as much as is feasible, to eliminate the
              latency due to fetching data from memory into the D-cache and storing results from
              the registers into it.
                   As noted above, the code for which this type of optimization has had the
              greatest success so far is so-called numerical or scientific code that spends most
              of its time executing nested loops that manipulate matrices of numerical values.
              The optimizations work by first elucidating patterns of data reuse in the loop nests
              and then transforming them to turn the reuse into patterns that exhibit locality of
              reference, i.e., the uses of the same data locations or cache blocks are made close
688   Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


      enough in time that they execute without causing the data to be flushed from the
      cache before they are reused.
           The primary technique for determining reuse patterns is dependence analysis,
      and the approach to bringing data uses closer together in time is transformation
      of the loop nests. We have given an overview of dependence analysis for array
      references in nested loops in Chapter 9, and we introduce the relevant loop trans­
      formations in Section 20.4.2. We then give an overview of an approach developed
      by Lam, Rothberg, and Wolf (see Section 20.7 for references) that is designed to
      eliminate as much as possible of the latency due to accessing the cache in a less than
      optimal manner.
           Next, we present data prefetching, a way to hide (rather than eliminate) some
      of the latency of fetching data, and thus a technique that should be applied after the
      loop transformations discussed above.
           Finally, we discuss briefly the interaction of scalar and memory-oriented op­
      timizations, the possibility of D-cache optimization for pointers and dynamically
      allocated data objects, and where in the compilation process to integrate the I-cache
      and D-cache optimizations.
           Before we discuss data-cache optimization, note that it is most frequently ap­
      plied to loops that contain floating-point computation and, as discussed in Sec­
      tion 12.3.2, that is exactly the area in which we must be most careful not to alter
      the effect of a computation by rearranging it. In Section 12.3.2, we pointed out that
      if MF denotes the maximal finite floating-point value in a given precision, then

          1.0 + (MF —MF) = 1.0

      while

          (1.0 + MF) —MF = 0.0

      This generalizes to loops as follows. Let the values stored in the array A[1 • -3*n] be

          A[3*i+l] =1.0
          A[3*i+2] = MF
          A[3*i+3] = -MF

      for i = 0 to i = n-1. Then the hir loops in Figure 20.18(a) and (b) both assign the
      value 0 .0 to s, while the loop in (c) assigns it the value 1.0 and that in (d) assigns it
      the value n.
           Section 11.10 of the Fortran 77 standard restricts the order of evaluation of
      loops to be “ as written,” and thus disallows the transformations above.
           However, the loop transformations used in Figure 20.18, namely, reversal and
      tiling, are most frequently implemented in optimizers that are applied to Fortran
      programs. Thus, it is the responsibility of the compiler to inform the user about the
      transformations it makes and it is the responsibility of the user to verify that the
      transformations do not alter the result of a computation. This also suggests strongly
      that it is essential for the user to be able to control the transformations that are
      applied to specific loops.
              Section 20.4       Data-Cache Optimization                                                      689

              s <- 0.0                                     s <- 0.0
              for i <- 1 to 3*n do                         for i <- 3 to 3*n do
                                                               t <- 0.0
                                                               for j <- i-2 to i do
                    s <- s + A [i]                               t <- t + A [j]
                                                               endfor
                                                               s <- s + t
              endfor                                       endfor
              (a)                                          (b)
              s <- 0.0                                     s <- 0.0
              for i    3*n by -1 to 1 do                   for i <- 3*n by -3 to 3 do
                                                               t <- 0.0
                                                               for j <- i by -1 to i-2 do
                    s <- s + A[i]                                t <- t + A[j]
                                                               endfor
                                                               s <- s + t
              endfor                                       endfor
              (c)                                         (d)

 FIG, 20.18 hir loops that sum the same sequence of floating-point values but that produce different
            results. The loops in (a) and (b) produce the result 0.0, while the one in (c) produces
            1.0 and the one in (d) produces n.


20.4.1        Interprocedural Arrangement o f Data
              An interprocedural approach to improving D-cache usage is to arrange large data ob­
              jects in memory so as to decrease the likelihood of their interfering with each other
              in the D-cache. This requires information about the patterns of usage of the data
              objects and requires the availability of all the data objects (i.e., their static initializa­
              tions, if any, and the code that addresses them) at the same time for rearrangement.
              This, in turn, requires interprocedural dependence analysis and having the entire
              load image available to operate on, and so is unlikely to be undertaken in real com­
              pilers any time soon. Should this approach become a realistic possibility, the work of
              Gupta [Gupt90] provides proofs that optimal arrangement of data is N P-complete
              and gives polynomial-time algorithms that provide good approximations in practice.


20.4.2        Loop Transformations
              We consider uses of subscripted variables in perfectly nested loops in hir that
              are expressed in canonical or normalized form,5 i.e., each loop’s index runs from
              1 to some value n by Is and only the innermost loop has statements other than


              5. Although all our loops are originally in canonical form, some of the transformations described
              below (e.g., tiling) produce loops with increments other than 1. While such loops could be put in
              canonical form, there is no point in doing so, since they represent the final stage after transforma­
              tions have been applied.
690        Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


           fo r statements within it. This simplifies the presentation somewhat but is not essen­
           tial. Let

                fo r i <- a by b to c do
                    statements
                endfor

           be a loop with arbitrary bounds and increment. Then

                fo r i i <- 1 by 1 to n do
                     i <r- a + ( i i - 1) * b
                   statements
                endfor

           where n = |_(c —a + b)/b_|, is a corresponding loop in canonical form.
               Loop transformations do things like interchanging two nested loops, reversing
           the order in which a loop’s iterations are performed, fusing two loop bodies together
           into one, and so on. If chosen properly, they provide opportunities to execute a
           loop nest so that the semantics of the program containing it are preserved and its
           performance is improved. The performance improvement may come from better
           use of the memory hierarchy, from making a loop’s iterations executable in parallel
           by several processors, from making a loop’s iterations vectorizable, or from some
           combination of these factors. Our use of loop transformations concentrates on
           optimizing the use of registers, data caches, and other levels of the memory hierarchy.
           We leave parallelization and vectorization to other texts, as discussed in Section 1.5.
               There are three general types of loop transformations that we deal with, namely,

      1.   unimodular transformations,
      2.   loop fusion and distribution, and
      3.   tiling.

                Wolf and Lam ([WolL91] and [Wolf92]) provide a convenient characterization
           of a large class of loop transformations. They define the class of unimodular loop
           transformations as those whose effect can be represented by the product of a uni­
           modular matrix with a (column) distance vector.6 A unimodular matrix is a square
           matrix with all integral components and with a determinant of 1 or —1. As we shall
           see, loop interchange, more general permutations of nested loop control, loop skew­
           ing, loop reversal, and a series of other useful transformations are all unimodular.
                Define a distance vector Q\ , 1*2 , . . . , in} to be lexicographically positive if it has
           at least one nonzero element and the first nonzero element in it is positive. The
           definition extends in the natural way to the other ordering relations. Wolf proves
           that a unimodular transformation represented by the matrix U is legal when applied
           to a loop nest with a set of lexicographically non-negative distance vectors D if and


           6. Recall the definition of distance vector from Section 9.3.
             Section 20.4      Data-Cache Optimization                                                     691

             for i <- 1 to n do
                for j <- 1 to n do
                    a[i,j] <- (a[i-l,j] + a[i+l,j])/2.0
                endfor
             endfor

FIG. 20.19 The assignment in this h ir loop nest has the distance vector (1, 0).


             for j <- 1 to n do
                for i <r- 1 to n do
                    a[i,j] <- (a[i-l,j] + a[i+l,j])/2.0
                endfor
             endfor

FIG. 20.20 The code in Figure 20.19 with the loops interchanged.


             only if, for each d e D y Ud >z 0, i.e., if and only if it transforms the lexicographically
             positive distance vectors to lexicographically positive distance vectors.7
                 We next consider some examples of unimodular transformations, the corre­
             sponding matrices, and their effects on loop nests.
                 Loop interchange is the transformation that reverses the order of two adjacent
             loops in a loop nest. It is characterized by a matrix that is the identity except that two
             adjacent Is on the diagonal have their rows and columns switched. As an example,
             consider the code in Figure 20.19, which has the distance vector (1,0). The loop-
             interchange matrix is

                  r°1 onj
             and the product of the interchange matrix with the distance vector is




             and the result of applying the transformation is shown in Figure 20.20; note that the
             resulting distance vector is lexicographically positive, so the transformation is legal.
                 Loop permutation generalizes loop interchange by allowing more than two
             loops to be moved at once and by not requiring them to be adjacent. For example,
             the unimodular matrix
                    0 0 1 0
                    0 0 0 1
                    1 0   0 0
                    0 1 0   0
             represents interchanging the first of four nested loops with the third and the second
             with the fourth.

             7. Note that a unimodular matrix must transform the zero vector (and only it) to the zero vector.
692           O ptim ization for the M em ory Hierarchy


              for i <- 1 to n do                                     for i 4- l to n do
                 for j <- 1 to n do                                     for j     i+1 to i+n do
                     a[i] <- a[i+j] + 1.0                                   a[i] <- a[j] + 1.0
                 endfor                                                 endfor
              endfor                                                 endfor
              (a)                                                    (b)
 FIG. 20.21   (a) A h i r l o o p n e s t , a n d (b ) th e r e s u lt o f s k e w in g th e in n e r lo o p .




                                                                1 0 0 0;*0    - *       - *




                      (T:0-<>,:KD                               2                   < $ -o -o : *o
                                                                3                             ( S -o -o -* o

                                          o     —o              4                                      c5 -o —0---0
              (a)                                                       (b)

 FIG. 20.22 Transformation of (a) the iteration-space traversal of the loop nest shown in
            Figure 20.21(a) by skewing (b).


                  Loop reversal reverses the order in which a particular loop’s iterations are
              performed. The appropriate matrix is the identity with a —1 in place of the 1 that
              corresponds to the loop to be reversed. For example, the matrix

                     "1       0      0"
                       0 - 1 0
                       0 0     1

              corresponds to reversing the direction of the middle of three loops. If we were to
              apply loop reversal to the outer loop in the code in Figure 20.19, it would correspond
              to the matrix-vector multiplication

                       -1                           -1
                        0                            0

              The resulting distance vector (—1 ,0 ) is lexicographically negative, so the transfor­
              mation is not applicable.
                  Loop skewing changes the shape of a loop’s iteration space. For example, it
              might transform the loop in Figure 20.21(a) to that in (b), which corresponds to
              changing the iteration-space traversal from the one shown in Figure 20.22(a) to that
              Section 20.4     Data-Cache Optimization                                            693

              for i <- 1 to n do
                 a[i] <- a[i] + 1.0                 for i     1 to n do
              endfor                                   a[i]    a[i] + 1.0
              for j <- 1 to n do                       b[i]    a[i] * 0.618
                 b[j] <- a[j] * 0.618               endfor
              endfor
              (a)                                   (b)
FIG, 20.23 (a) A pair of hir loops, and (b) the result of fusing them.



                         for i <- 1 to n do                        for i <- 1 to n do
             SI             a[i] <- b[i]                              a[i] <- b[i]
                         endfor                                    endfor
                         for i <- 1 to n do                        for i <- 1 to n do
             S2             b[i-l]    c[i] + 1.5                      b[i+l] <- c[i] + 1.5
                         endfor                                    endfor
                         (a)                                       (b)
                         for i <- 1 to n do                        for i <- 1 to n do
             51             a[i] <- b[i]                              a[i] <- b[i]
             52             b[i-l] <- c[i] + 1.5                      b[i+l] <- c[i] + 1.5
                         endfor                                    endfor
                         (c)                                       (d )
FIG. 20.24 Two pairs of hir loops, (a) and (b), and the results of fusing them in (c) and (d),
           respectively. In the fused loop (c), there is one dependence, S2 (1) SI, while in loop (d),
           the dependence is SI (1) S2, so loop fusion is legal for the example in (a) but not for the
           one in (b).



             in (b). The matrix corresponding to this transformation is



                    [1   !]
             which is unimodular.
                  Loop fusion, distribution, and tiling are three important transformations that
             are not unimodular.
                  Loop fusion takes two adjacent loops that have the same iteration-space
             traversal and combines their bodies into a single loop, as shown, for example, in
             Figure 20.23. Loop fusion is legal as long as the loops have the same bounds and as
             long as there are no flow, anti-, or output dependences in the fused loop for which
             instructions from the first loop depend on instructions from the second loop (outer
             loops do not affect the legality of the transformation). As an example, applying fu­
             sion to the loops in Figure 20.24(a) results in the loop in (c). The only dependence
             is S2 (1) SI, so the transformation is legal. On the other hand, for the loops in
694           O ptim ization for the M emory Hierarchy

                                                                  for i <- 1 by 2 to n do
               for i <- 1 to n do                                    for j <- i to min(i+l,n) do
                  b[i]    a[i]/b[i]                                      b[i]    a[i]/b[i]
                  a[i+l] <- a[i] + 1.0                                   a[i+l] <- a[i] + 1.0
               endfor                                                endfor
                                                                  endfor
              (a)                                                 (b)
 FIG. 20.25   (a) A h i r loop, and (b) the result of tiling it with a tile size of 2.




              (b), fusing them results in (d) with the only dependence being SI (1) S2, so fusion
              is not legal.
                   L o o p d istrib u tio n does the opposite of loop fusion. It takes a loop that contains
              multiple statements and splits it into two loops with the same iteration-space traver­
              sal, such that the first loop contains some of the statements inside the original loop
              and the second contains the others. Figure 20.23 provides an example of loop dis­
              tribution also, with (b) before and (a) after. Loop distribution is legal if it does not
              result in breaking any cycles in the dependence graph of the original loop (again,
              outer loops do not affect the transformation).
                   T ilin g is a loop transformation that increases the depth of a loop nest. Given an
              n -deep nest, tiling may make it anywhere from (n + l)-deep to 2«-deep, depending
              on how many of the loops are tiled. Tiling a single loop replaces it by a pair of loops,
              with the inner one (called the tile lo o p ) having an increment equal to that of the
              original loop8 and the outer one having an increment equal to u b — lb + 1, where
              lb and u b are the lower and upper bounds of the inner loop, respectively; tiling
              interchanges loops from the tiled one inward to make the tile loop the innermost
              loop in the nest. The number of iterations of the tile loop is called the tile siz e .
              For example, in Figure 20.25, the loop in (a) has been tiled with a tile of size 2
              in (b).
                   Tiling one or more of a nest of loops rearranges its iteration-space traversal
              so that it consists o f a series of small polyhedra executed one after the other.9
              Figure 20.26 shows the result of tiling both loops in the code in Figure 20.21(a) with
              tile sizes of 2. Figure 20.27 shows the resulting iteration-space traversal, assuming
              that n = 6.



              8. However, as shown in Figure 20.25(b), there may be a min operator to guarantee that the tiled
              version executes the proper number of iterations the last time through the outer loop.
              9. Tiling is also known by three other names in the literature. It has been called “ blocking,” but we
              choose not to use that name because it has at least two other meanings in computer science already.
              Wolfe calls it “ strip mine and interchange” because creation of a tile loop divides a given loop into a
              series of loops that execute “ strips” of the original ones. Callahan, Carr, and Kennedy call tiling an
              innermost loop “ unroll and jam ” because it can be thought of as unrolling some number of copies
              and then “ jamming” them together into a loop.
              Section 20.4        Data-Cache Optimization                                           695
              for i <r- 1 by 2 to n do
                 for j <r- l by 2 to n do
                     for il <- i to min(i+l,n) do
                        for jl <- j to min(j+l,n) do
                            a[il] <- a[il+jl] + i.o
                        endfor
                     endfor
                 endfor
              endfor

 FIG. 20.26 The result of tiling both loops in the h ir loop nest shown in Figure 20.21(a) with a tile
            size of 2.


                                                3

                         1    2             3        4      5        6


                        o —+p „ o - - o P--+P
                               /        /
                        c t—+d
                                                .........
                               ,o -* o
                        c t—+d C                            d :::+o
                               _—- - "
                      t)     \1                             P~-yo
                        c t—+d                              cP—*o
 FIG. 20.27 Iteration-space traversal of the tiled loop nest in Figure 20.26, with n = 6.


                  Tiling a loop nest is legal exactly when the tile loops can be interchanged with
              the other loops to make the tile loops innermost. In particular, tiling the innermost
              loop is always legal.

20.4.3        Locality and Tiling
              The most important technique for maximizing data-cache effectiveness for loop nests
              is to exploit locality of reference in areas of arrays that are larger than single elements
              or cache blocks. While there may be no exploitable reuse at all in a given loop nest,
696        Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


           its pattern of cache usage may still be improvable by focusing its work on segments
           of the arrays.
                Consider the matrix-multiplication example in Figure 20.1(a) and what we have
           found out about it above, namely, that any order of the loops is legal. We can apply
           tiling to it to cause it to operate on subarrays of any desired size. If the tile sizes
           are chosen optimally, each fragment of the work may be computable without any
           cache misses other than compulsory ones; further, if we select the best arrangement
           of the tiles with respect to each other in the looping structure, we may be able to
           reduce even the number of compulsory misses for a tile by taking advantage of
           reuse between consecutive tiles. Creating a tile loop for each loop results in the
           code in Figure 20.28(a). Now, since the original loops can be arbitrarily reordered,
           we can move all the tile loops to make them the innermost loops, as shown in
           Figure 20.28(b). The result is a loop nest that works on T x T sections of the arrays,
           with a traversal pattern analogous to that shown in Figure 20.27; also, of course,
           scalar replacement of array elements can be applied to C ( i i , j j ) . If T is chosen
           judiciously, tiling reduces cache conflicts by causing fewer elements of each array
           to need to be present in the data cache at once to perform the given computation.
                While tiling is often very valuable in reducing cache interference and hence for
           increasing performance, we are left with three questions:

      1.   What happens if a loop nest is not fully tilable?
      2.   How does cache organization impact the effectiveness of tiling?
      3.   How do we select the tile sizes for a given loop nest and loop bounds to be most
           effective?

           Whether a loop nest is fully tilable may or may not affect its performance—it
           depends on where tiling is needed. Consider the h i r loop nest in Figure 20.29. The
           inner loop clearly will not benefit from tiling, while the outer one will if the rows of
           the array a [ ] may interfere with each other in the cache. Permuting the two loops
           in Figure 20.29 provides an example that will benefit from tiling only the inner loop.
           On the other hand, we may have a loop nest with an iteration space that is large in
           several dimensions but for which some loops are not permutable, and hence are not
           tilable. One may, at least, tile the loops that are permutable to be the innermost ones
           and there are usually performance gains to be derived from doing so.
                The organization of the data cache can make a dramatic difference in the overall
           effectiveness of tiling and on the effectiveness of a particular tile size for a given loop
           size. Suppose we have a direct-mapped cache and some particular loop nest. While
           the cache may be large enough to hold most of the data being processed, it may not
           be able to do so without collisions between the contents of different arrays, or even
           between two parts of the same array. Even if we fully tile the loop nest, we may
           need to make the tile sizes surprisingly small compared to the size of the cache to
           avoid collisions. Having a set-associative cache obviously reduces the frequency of
           such collisions, but the more arrays we are processing in a single loop nest, the less
           effectively it does so.
             Section 20.4    Data-Cache Optimization                                            697

             do i = 1,N,T
               do ii - i,min(i+T-l,N)
                 do j = 1,N,T
                   do jj = j,min(j+T-l,N)
                     do k = 1 ,N,T
                       do kk = k,min(k+T-l,N)
                                     = C(ii,jj) + A(ii,kk) * B(kk,jj)
                       enddo
                     enddo
                   enddo
                 enddo
               enddo
             enddo

             (a)

             do i = 1,N,T
               do j = 1,N,T
                 do k = 1,N,T
                   do ii = i,min(i+T-l,N)
                     do jj = j,min(j+T-l,N)
                       do kk » k,min(k+T-l,N)
                         C(ii,jj) = C(ii,jj) + A(ii ,kk) * B(kk,jj)
                       enddo
                     enddo
                   enddo
                 enddo
               enddo
             enddo

             (b)
FIG. 20.28   (a) Fortran matrix multiplication from Figure 20.1(a) with a tile loop for each index,
             and (b) the result of tiling all the loops.


               for i <- 1 to N do
                  for j <- 1 to 3 do
                      a[i,j] <r- (a[i-l,j-1] + a[i,j] + a[N+l-i,j+1] )/j
                  endfor
               endfor

FIG. 20.29   A hir example for which tiling may benefit at most one of the two loops.


                 Choosing a fixed tile size independent o f the loop bounds can prove disastrous,
             again especially for direct-mapped caches. A particular com bination o f loop bounds
             and tile size can be very effective for reducing collision misses, while changing the
             loop bounds by as little as 1% or 2 % and keeping the tile size fixed can dram atically
698           Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


              increase collisions and reduce performance by a large factor. Thus, it is essential
              that tile sizes be allowed to change with the loop bounds and that one have either
              experience with their interaction to base choices on, a theory that explains their
              interaction, or preferably both.
                  Wolf ([WolL91] and [Wolf92]) provides an excellent treatment of both the
              theoretical and practical sides of choosing tile sizes; he also gives examples of the
              phenomena discussed in the preceding paragraph.

20.4.4        Using Hardware Assists: Data Prefetching
              Some of the newer 64-bit Rises—such as Alpha, PowerPC, and sparc-V9—include
              data prefetching instructions that provide a hint to the data cache that the block
              containing a specified address is needed soon. For example, in sparc-V9, the data
              prefetch instruction can specify prefetching of a block for one or several reads or
              writes. The meanings of the four types are as follows:
         1.   Several reads: fetch the data into the D-cache nearest to the processor.
         2.   One read: fetch the data into a data prefetch buffer and don’t disturb the cache, since
              the data are used only once; if the data are already in the D-cache, leave them as is.
         3.   Several writes: fetch the data into the D-cache nearest the processor, in preparation
              for writing part(s) of its contents.
         4.   One write: fetch the data for writing, but, if possible, do it in such a way as not to
              affect the D-cache.
              Alpha’s (fe tc h and fetch_m) and PowerPC’s (debt and d e b tst) data prefetching
              instructions hint that the block containing the given byte address should be fetched
              into the D-cache for reading or writing, respectively. For Alpha, the block fetched,
              if any, is at least 512 bytes in size, which may be too large for some applications, as
              discussed in the preceding section.
                   Note that prefetching does not reduce the latency of fetching data from memory
              to the cache—rather it hides it by overlapping it with other operations. Thus, the
              two operations are, to a degree, complementary, but we should still prefer to reduce
              latency by exploiting data reuse first and only then use prefetching.
                   Prefetching is most useful in loops that access large arrays sequentially. For loops
              that contain a single basic block, the generation of prefetch instructions can be driven
              by detecting the sequential access patterns, and the address to prefetch from can be
              a constant offset from an induction variable. To determine at what point a prefetch
              should be issued, we proceed as follows. Define the following four quantities:
         1.   T(00p is the number of cycles taken by one iteration of the loop without doing
              prefetching, assuming that the needed data are in the cache.
         2.   tuse is the number of cycles from the beginning of an iteration to the data’s first use
              in the loop.
         3.   tpref is the issue latency of the data prefetch instruction.
Section 20.4      Data-Cache Optimization                                                 699


Tpref is the result latency of the data prefetch instruction; i.e., tpref + Tpref cycles
after the prefetch instruction is issued, the data are available in the cache.

The first use of the zth block occurs at cycle tuse + i * T/00p for i = 0 ,1 ,2 , . . . without
prefetching and at tuse + i * (T\oop + tpref) for i = 0, 1, 2, . . . with prefetching. To
have the data available at time tuse + i * (Tioop + tpref)-> they must be prefetched
tpref + Tpref cycles earlier, or

          Tpref
      Tloop    tpref

iterations back and Tpref mod(T/00p + tpref) cycles earlier than that.
     For example, suppose a loop takes 20 cycles to complete an iteration and that
its first use of the cached data occurs at cycle 5 within the loop. Let the prefetch
instruction have a 1-cycle issue latency and a 25-cycle result latency. Then the
prefetch for a given iteration should be placed [25/(20 + 1)J = 1 iteration earlier
and 25 (mod 20 + 1) = 4 cycles before the first use point, or at cycle 1 of the iteration
preceding the one that uses the prefetched data, and the prefetch instruction should
specify the address of the data used in the next iteration. If the first use of the data
occurs at cycle 2 of each iteration, the prefetch should be placed 1 iteration and 4
cycles earlier, i.e., 2 iterations earlier and at cycle 19 of that iteration.
     Note that, unlike other D-cache-oriented optimizations discussed in this chapter,
this one requires that we know the number of cycles that a loop iteration takes, so it
needs to be performed on low-level code. On the other hand, this optimization also
needs to know what address to use for each prefetch—information that can best be
determined as a base address plus a subscript value from high-level code and then
passed along to the low-level code.
     One complication that may occur is that the size of the block fetched may be too
large for prefetching to be useful in every iteration. Loop unrolling can help in this
case—unrolling by a factor of n allows us to issue one prefetch per n iterations—
but even this may not be enough; in such a case, the prefetch needs to be protected
by a conditional that checks the value of the induction variable modulo the size of a
cache block.
     Another complication is that there may be more than one array that benefits
from prefetching. If the arrays and prefetches are not carefully arranged, they may
increase collisions in the cache. The linker and compilers can cooperatively improve
the effectiveness of sequential prefetching by proper placement of large arrays rela­
tive to cache-block boundaries.
     Mowry, Lam, and Gupta ([MowL92] and [Mowr94]) describe a somewhat
more sophisticated approach to data prefetching than the one given above. Their
evaluation of an algorithm like the one above suggests that if all data are prefetched,
approximately 60% of the prefetches are wasted effort. Since prefetches occupy the
CPU, the D-cache, and the bus between the D-cache and memory, reducing them to
the minimum needed is desirable.
700    Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


            Their approach centers on determining the leading reference to a cache line (i.e.,
       the reference that would cause it to be loaded into the cache) and a prefetch predicate
       that determines whether the data need to be prefetched for each particular loop
       iteration i. They use the predicate to transform the loop—if the predicate is i = 0,
       they peel the first iteration of the loop, while if it is / = 0 (mod «), then they unroll
       the loop by a factor of n. Next they place the prefetch instructions essentially as
       we describe above, but only for the iterations that their analysis has shown to need
       them. If the loop transformation would result in the code becoming so large that it
       impacts I-cache performance, they either suppress the transformation or insert code
       that uses the prefetch predicate to control prefetching.


20.5   Scalar vs. Memory-Oriented Optimizations
       Whitfield and Soffa [WhiS90] and Wolfe [Wolf90] have studied the interactions
       between traditional scalar optimizations and the newer parallelism- and D-cache-
       oriented optimizations. They show that some scalar optimizations can disable paral­
       lel optimizations; that the ordering of the optimizations is very important and needs
       to be varied from one program to another to achieve maximal performance; and
       that, in some cases, performing the inverses of some scalar optimizations is essential
       to enabling some D-cache optimizations.
            For example, Whitfield and Soffa show that loop-invariant code motion can
       make loop interchange and loop fusion inapplicable, and Wolfe shows that common-
       subexpression elimination can inhibit loop distribution. Clearly, it follows from
       these results that inverting the inhibiting transformations may make the others
       applicable in some instances where they were not originally.


20.6   Wrap-Up
       This chapter has discussed optimization techniques that take advantage of the mem­
       ory hierarchy, particularly of data and instruction caches and CPU registers.
            Even the earliest computer designs distinguished between main memory and
       registers. Main memories have been larger and slower than registers and, in many
       systems, operations other than loads and stores have required at least one operand
       (and in some cases all) to be in registers; Rise systems, of course, are in the last
       category.
            The difference between the processor’s cycle time and the memory-access time
       has increased to the point where it is now necessary in most systems to have caches
       between memory and the registers. A memory access directed to an address repre­
       sented in a cache is satisfied by it rather than by main memory (or, in the case of a
       store, possibly in parallel with memory). Caches depend on the spatial and temporal
       locality properties of programs for their effectiveness. Where they can be depended
       on, programs run at a speed determined by the CPU and the cache(s). If they cannot
       be relied on, loads, stores, and instruction fetches run at main memory speeds.
Section 20.6    Wrap-Up                                                             701

      To deal with the disparity in speeds, we have first discussed techniques for
dealing with instruction caches; then we have considered how to improve register
allocation for array elements and techniques for dealing with data caches.
      The instruction-cache-related techniques include instruction prefetching, proce­
dure sorting, procedure and block placement, procedure splitting, and combining the
intra- and interprocedural methods. Prefetching allows one to provide a hint to the
memory that a particular block of code is likely to be needed soon, indicating that
it should be fetched into the cache when spare memory and cache cycles are avail­
able. Procedure sorting provides a way to place procedure bodies in a load module
in such a way as to increase their locality of reference and to decrease their interfer­
ence with each other. Intraprocedural code positioning, or block sorting, attempts to
determine an order of the basic blocks in a procedure that minimizes branching by
making as many of the branches as possible take the fall-through path, and secon­
darily by making branches forward wherever possible. In fact, loop unrolling can be
thought of as a variation on block sorting, since if we unroll a loop—for simplicity’s
sake, a one-block loop— by a factor of «, then there is one backward branch in place
of each n of them previously. Procedure splitting seeks to improve locality further
by separating procedures into frequently and infrequently executed segments and by
collecting segments of each type together in the load module. Finally, we briefly men­
tioned an approach to combining intra- and interprocedural techniques to achieve
as great a gain as possible.
      The most important of the I-cache-related optimizations are usually procedure
sorting and procedure and block placement, with instruction prefetching next, and
procedure splitting last.
      Next, we focused on improving register allocation for array elements, data-
cache-related techniques, and data prefetching. Scalar replacement of array elements
is designed to take advantage of sequential multiple accesses to array elements by
making them candidates for register allocation, as well as all the other optimiza­
tions that are typically applied to scalars. The most important of the data-related
optimizations are usually the data-cache-related ones, especially tiling, with scalar
replacement of array elements next, and finally data prefetching.
      We gave an introduction to and overview of data-cache optimization. This is an
area where there are, as yet, no clear winners among the approaches to use, although
there are methods that deal effectively with various classes of problems. As a result,
we have steered clear of describing any one approach in detail, providing instead a
basic understanding of the problem, how it relates to the data dependence material
in Chapter 9, and suggesting some candidates for effective approaches to dealing
with data-cache optimization.
      Finally, we discussed briefly the interaction between scalar and memory-oriented
optimizations.
      Most data-related optimizations for the memory hierarchy are best done on
high- or medium-level code that includes representations for loops and subscript
lists. Thus, they are placed in block A in the order of optimizations diagram in
Figure 20.30. In contrast, data prefetching needs to be inserted into low-level code,
but uses information gathered from analyzing high-level code; we put it in block D.
702           O ptim ization for the M emory Hierarchy




 FIG. 20.30   Order of optimizations, with optimizations for the memory hierarchy shown in bold
              type.


                   Instruction-cache optimizations and instruction prefetching, on the other hand,
              benefit from being done very late in the compilation process, when the final form of
              the code is better comprehended. Thus, we add intraprocedural I-cache optimization
              and instruction prefetching to block D and the interprocedural form of the optimiza­
              tion to block E.
                   This area, and particularly data-oriented optimization, will bear careful watch­
              ing over the next decade or two. There are sure to be m ajor improvements made in
              the approaches to the problem, but it is difficult to say precisely where they will come
              Section 20.7    Further Reading                                                    703




 FIG. 20.30   (continued)



              from. Clearly, mathematical analysis, modeling of performance data, and brute force
              experimentation will all play a part, but whether any or all of them or some other
              insight or insights will be the sources of essential contributions is simply not clear.



20.7          Further Reading
              Bell’s work on the effect of tuning numerically intensive program s by hand to take
              better advantage of the IBM R S/6000’s pipelines and caches is reported in [Bell90].
                   The I-cache optimization methods discussed in detail here are based on the
              work of Pettis and Hansen [PetH90]. M cFarling’s work is described in [M cFa89],
              [M cFa91a], and [McFa91b].
                   Scalar replacement, or register pipelining, was developed by Callahan, Carr, and
              Kennedy [CalC90].
                   Wolfe [Wolf89a] calls tiling “ strip mine and interchange” ; Callahan, Carr, and
              Kennedy [CalC90] call it “ unroll and jam .”
                   Lam, Rothberg, and Wolf’s approach to D-cache optimization is described in
              [LamR91], [Wolf92], and [WolL91].
704          Optimization for the Memory Hierarchy


                  Gupta [Gupt90] discusses global approaches to the arrangement of data to take
             good advantage of D-caches.
                  The characterization of a large class of loop transformations as corresponding
             to unimodular transformations of a vector space is found in [W61L91] and [Wolf92].
                  Mowry, Lam, and Gupta’s data prefetching algorithm is discussed in [MowL92]
             and further elaborated in [Mowr94].
                  Whitfield and Soffa’s and Wolfe’s studies of the interactions between scalar
             optimizations and parallelism- and D-cache-oriented optimizations are in [WhiS90]
             and [Wolf90], respectively.
                  See Section 9.8 for references to work on characterizing the memory use patterns
             of recursive data structures and pointers.


20.8         Exercises
       20.1 Which of the optimizations discussed in preceding chapters are likely to enhance the
            effect of procedure sorting (Section 20.2.2), and why?
       20.2 Which of the optimizations discussed in preceding chapters are likely to enhance the
            effect of intraprocedural code positioning (Section 20.2.4), and why?
       20.3 Write an ican algorithm to perform scalar replacement of array references in a (non­
            nested) loop that contains only a single basic block.
       20.4 Extend the algorithm in Exercise 20.3 to deal with nonlooping control-flow con­
            structs inside the loop.
       20.5 Give an example of a loop to which loop distribution applies and an optimization
            that makes loop distribution inapplicable.
       20.6 Give an example of a doubly nested loop for which scalar replacement of array
            references applies to the inner loop. What happens if you unroll the inner loop by a
            factor of 4?
                                                                 CHAPTER 21




     Case Studies of Compilers
            and Future Trends




I
      n this chapter, we discuss a series of commercial compiling systems and give a
      short list of expected trends in the future development of compilers. The compil­
      ers cover several source languages and four architectures. They represent a wide
      spectrum of implementation strategies, intermediate-code structures, approaches to
code generation and optimization, and so on. For each compiler family, we first
give a thumbnail sketch of the machine architecture or architectures for which it is
targeted.
      Some systems, such as the IBM X L compilers for p o w e r and PowerPC, do
almost all traditional optimizations on a very low-level intermediate code. Other
systems, such as the DEC GEM compilers for Alpha, use a medium-level interme­
diate code, while still others, such as Sun’s s p a r c compilers and Intel’s 386 family
compilers, split the work of optimization between a medium-level and a low-level
intermediate code. Yet even the IBM compilers include a higher-level intermediate
form on which to do storage-hierarchy optimizations.
      In the sections that follow, we use two example programs to illustrate the ef­
fects of the various compilers. The first is the C routine in Figure 21.1. Note that
in the i f statement inside the loop, the value of kind is the constant RECTANGLE,
so the second branch of the conditional and the test itself are dead code. The
value of len gth * width is loop-invariant and, as a result, the accumulation of
a re a (= 10 * len gth * width) can be done by a single multiplication. We should
expect the compilers to unroll the loop by some factor and, of course, to do register
allocation and instruction scheduling. If all the local variables are allocated to regis­
ters, there may be no need to allocate a stack frame for the routine. Also, the call to
p ro ce ss ( ) is a tail call.
     The second example is the Fortran 77 routine shown in Figure 21.2. The main
program simply initializes the elements of the array a ( ) and calls s l ( ). The sec­
ond and third array references in s l ( ) are to the same element, so computation of
its address should be subject to common-subexpression elimination. The innermost

                                                                                705
706              C a se S tu d ie s o f C o m p ile r s an d F u tu re T re n d s


                 1     int length, width, radius;
                 2     enum figure {RECTANGLE, CIRCLE};
                 3     main( )
                 4     { int area = 0, volume = 0, height;
                 5        enum figure kind = RECTANGLE;
                 6        for (height = 0; height < 10; height++)
                 7        {   if (kind == RECTANGLE)
                 8            {   area += length * width;
                 9                volume += length * width * height;
                 10                 >
                 11                 else if (kind == CIRCLE)
                 12                 { area += 3.14 * radius * radius;
                 13                    volume + - 3.14 * radius * radius * height;
                 14                 >
                 15          >
                 16          process(area,volume);
                 17      >

  FIG. 21.1      A C procedure that is used as an exam ple in this chapter.



                 1                      integer a(500,500), k, 1
                 2                      do 20 k = 1,500
                 3                          do 20 1 = 1,500
                 4                               a(k,l) = k + 1
                 5           20         continue
                 6                      call si(a,500)
                 7                      end
                 8
                 9                      subroutine sl(a,n)
                 10                     integer a(500,500),n
                 11                     do 100 i = l,n
                 12                         do 100 j = i+l,n
                 13                            do 100 k = l,n
                 14                               1 = a(k,i)
                 15                               m = a(k,j)
                 16                               a(k,j) * 1 + m
                 17          100        continue
                 18                     end

  F IG . 21 .2   A Fortran 77 program that is used as an exam ple in this chapter.



                 lo o p in s i ( ) sh ou ld be reduced to a sequence o f at m o st eight instruction s that load
                 the tw o values, ad d them , store the result, u pd ate both ad d resses, test for term ina­
                 tion, an d bran ch (the term in ation con d ition sh ou ld be m odified by linear-function
                 test replacem en t to be b ased on one o f the array elem ent add resses). The sequence
                 sh ou ld be sh orter for those arch itectures th at have storage-to-storage instructions,
                 lo a d s an d stores w ith a d d ress u pd ate, an d /o r co m p are and branch instructions. Som e
              Section 21.1    The Sun Compilers for SPARC                                         707

              of the compilers should be expected to software pipeline the innermost loop and un­
              roll it by some factor.
                    We should also expect at least some of the compilers to integrate the procedure
              s l ( ) into the main program. In fact, there are four options for how to deal with
              this, as follows:

         1.   compile the main program and s l ( ) separately (i.e., do no procedure integration),
         2.   integrate s i ( ) into the main program and compile a separate copy of it as well,
         3.   integrate s l ( ) into the main program and compile it to a trivial procedure that just
              does a return, or
         4.   integrate s l ( ) into the main program and remove s l ( ) entirely.

              The latter two possibilities are reasonable alternatives because the entire call graph
              of the program is evident— the main program calls s i ( ) and neither calls any other
              routines, so there can’t be another use of s l ( ) in the program in a separately
              compiled module. As we shall see, the second alternative is used by the Sun and
              Intel compilers, but the third and fourth are not used by any of these compilers. If
              the procedure is not inlined, interprocedural constant propagation could be used to
              determine that n has the value 500 in s i ( ).



21.1          The Sun Compilers for SPARC
21.1.1        The SPARC Architecture
              sparc has two major versions of the architecture, Versions 8 and 9. sparc Version
              8 is a relatively bare-bones 32-bit Rise system. A processor consists of an integer
              unit, a floating-point unit, and an optional (never implemented) coprocessor. The
              integer unit contains a set of 32-bit general registers and executes load, store, arith­
              metic, logical, shift, branch, call, and system-control instructions. It also computes
              addresses (register + register or register + displacement) for integer and floating­
              point load and store instructions. The integer registers comprise eight global registers
              (with register rO always delivering a zero value and discarding results written to it)
              and several overlapping windows of 24 registers each, consisting of eight ms, eight
              locals, and eight outs. Spilling register windows to memory and refilling them is
              handled by the operating system in response to traps.
                   The integer unit implements several specialized instructions, such as tagged adds
              and subtracts to support dynamically typed languages; store barrier to control the
              order of memory operations in multiprocessors; and save and restore, which switch
              register windows independently of the call and return instructions. The integer unit
              has condition codes that are optionally set by integer operations and by floating­
              point comparisons and that are used by branches to determine whether to jump
              or not.
                   Architecturally, sparc is designed to be pipelined, with some features of the
              pipeline exposed to the programmer. Branch and call instructions include a following
708      Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


         delay slot that is executed before the jump is completed,1 and the load instructions
         cause an interlock if the next instruction uses the value loaded.
               The floating-point unit has 32 32-bit floating-point data registers and imple­
         ments the ansi/ieee floating-point standard, although the architectural specification
         allows some of the minor features to be implemented by operating-system software.
         The registers may be paired to hold double-precision quantities or grouped in fours
         to hold quad-precision values. There are no moves between the integer and floating­
         point register sets. The floating-point unit performs loads and stores, arithmetic
         instructions, square root, converts to and from integers, and compares.
               sparc instructions typically have three operands—two sources and one result.
         The first source and the result are almost always registers, and the second source
         may be a register or a small constant. In the assembly language, the operand order
         is first source, second source, and then result. See Appendix A .l for more details of
         the sparc assembly-language syntax.
               sparc Version 9 is a newer architecture that is fully upward-compatible with
         Version 8. It extends the integer registers to 64 bits but provides condition codes for
         both 32- and 64-bit results of operations. A bit in the privileged Program Status
         Word indicates whether virtual address translation should produce 32- or 64-bit
         addresses. The integer instructions have been extended to include some that are 64-
         bit-specific (such as a load to a 64-bit register, in addition to the Version 8 64-bit
         load that sets a register pair), new branches that branch according to the 64-bit
         condition codes or the value in a register, and conditional register-move instructions.
         The privileged part of the architecture has been significantly redesigned to allow up
         to four trap levels and to make register-window spilling and refilling much faster.
               The floating-point architecture is largely unchanged, but a new register-naming
         scheme has been introduced that doubles the number of double- and quad-precision
         registers.
               Implementations of sparc have ranged from the first, a two-chip gate array with
         the integer and floating-point units on separate chips (actually the slightly different
         Version 7 architecture), to highly integrated single-chip designs with superscalar
         execution.


21.1.2   The Sun SPARC Compilers
         Sun provides sparc compilers for C, C++, Fortran 77, and Pascal. The C language
         supported is full ansi C, C++ conforms to AT& T’s specification of the language, the
         Fortran 77 has DEC and Cray compatibility features, and the Pascal conforms to
         the ansi standard with Apollo compatibility extensions. The compilers originated
         from the Berkeley 4.2 BSD unix software distribution and have been developed
         at Sun since 1982. The original back end was for the Motorola 68010 and was
         migrated successively to later members of the M 68000 family and then to sparc.
         Work on global optimization began in 1984 and on interprocedural optimization
         and parallelization in 1989. The organization of the optimizer follows the mixed


         1. The annul bit in the branches provides for the delay instruction to be executed or not according
         to whether the instruction branches or not.
            Section 21.1     The Sun Compilers for SPARC                                       709




FIG. 21.3 Sun s p a r c compiler structure.


            ENTRY "sl_" { IS_EXT_ENTRY,ENTRY.IS.GLOBAL >
                    GOTO LAB_32;
            LAB.32: LTEMP.l = ( .n { ACCESS V 4 1 » ;
                    i = 1;
                    CBRANCH (i <= LTEMP.l, 1:LAB_36, 0:LAB_35);
            LAB.36: LTEMP.2 = ( .n { ACCESS V 4 1 » ;
                      j = i + i;
                    CBRANCH (j <= LTEMP.2, 1:LAB_41, 0:LAB_40);
            LAB_41: LTEMP.3 = ( .n { ACCESS V 4 1 » ;
                    k = 1;
                    CBRANCH (k <- LTEMP.3, 1:LAB_46, 0:LAB_45);
            LAB_46: 1 = ( .a[k,i] { ACCESS V 2 0 » ;
                    m = ( .a [k,j] { ACCESS V20» ;
                    *(a[k,j]) = 1 + m { ACCESS V20, INT >;
            LAB_34: k = k + 1;
                    CBRANCH (k > LTEMP.3, 1:LAB_45, 0:LAB_46);
            LAB_45: j = j + 1;
                    CBRANCH (j > LTEMP.2, 1:LAB_40, 0:LAB_41);
            LAB_40: i = i + 1;
                    CBRANCH (i > LTEMP.l, 1:LAB_35, 0:LAB_36);
            LAB_35:

FIG. 21.4 Sun IR code for lines 9 through 17 in the Fortran 77 routine in Figure 21.2.


            model, with two optimizers, one used before code generation and the other after.
            The four compilers share their back-end components, namely, the global optimizer
            and code generator including the postpass optimizer, as shown in Figure 21.3.
                The target of the front ends is an intermediate language called Sun IR that
            represents a program as a linked list of triples representing executable operations and
            several tables representing declarative information. Figure 21.4 gives an example of
            Sun IR in the form produced by the front ends; it corresponds to lines 9 through
            17 of the code in Figure 21.2. The operators should mostly be self-explanatory; the
710        Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


           CBRANCH operator tests the first expression following it, producing a 1 or 0 result,
           and selecting the second or third operand, respectively, as a target label.
                If optimization is not enabled, the yabe (“ Yet Another Back End” ) code gener­
           ator is invoked to process the Sun IR code produced by the front end. It is designed
           for speed in code generation, does no optimization, and produces a relocatable ob­
           ject module. If optimization is enabled, the Sun IR is passed to the iro p t global
           optimizer and the code generator for processing.
                The compilers support four levels of optimization (in addition to no optimiza­
           tion), as follows:

      01   This level invokes only certain optimization components of the code generator.
      02   This and higher levels invoke both the global optimizer and the optimizer compo­
           nents of the code generator. At level 02, expressions that involve global or equiva-
           lenced variables, aliased local variables, or volatile variables are not candidates for
           optimization; automatic inlining, software pipelining, loop unrolling, and the early
           phase of instruction scheduling are not done.
      03   This level optimizes expressions that involve global variables but makes worst-case
           assumptions about potential aliases caused by pointers and omits early instruction
           scheduling and automatic inlining.
      04   This level aggressively tracks what pointers may point to, making worst-case as­
           sumptions only where necessary; it depends on the language-specific front ends to
           identify potentially aliased variables, pointer variables, and a worst-case set of po­
           tential aliases; it also does automatic inlining and early instruction scheduling.

                If global optimization is selected, the optimizer driver reads the Sun IR for
           a procedure, identifies basic blocks, and builds lists of successor and predecessor
           blocks for each block. If the highest level of optimization (04) is selected, the auto­
           matic inliner then replaces some calls to routines within the same compilation unit
           with inline copies of the called routines’ bodies, as described in Section 15.2. Next,
           tail-recursion elimination is performed and other tail calls are marked for the code
           generator to optimize. The resulting Sun IR is then processed by the a l ia s e r , which
           uses information that is provided by the language-specific front ends to determine
           which sets of variables may, at some point in the procedure, map to the same mem­
           ory location. How aggressive the a l i a s e r is at minimizing the sizes of sets of aliased
           variables depends on the level of optimization selected, as discussed above. Aliasing
           information is attached to each triple that requires it, for use by the global optimizer.
                Control-flow analysis is done by identifying dominators and back edges, except
           that the parallelizer does structural analysis for its own purposes. All data-flow
           analysis is done iteratively.
                The global optimizer iro p t then processes each procedure body, first comput­
           ing additional control-flow information; in particular, loops are identified at this
           point, including both explicit loops (e.g., do loops in Fortran 77) and implicit ones
           constructed from i f s and gotos. Then a series of data-flow analyses and transfor­
           mations is applied to the procedure. Each transformation phase first computes (or
           recomputes) data-flow information if needed. The result of the transformations is a
      Section 21.1    The Sun Compilers for SPARC                                     711

      modified version of the Sun IR code for the procedure. The global optimizer does
      the following transformations, in this order:
 1.   scalar replacement of aggregates and expansion of Fortran arithmetic operations on
      complex numbers to sequences of real-arithmetic operations
 2.   dependence-based analysis and transformation (levels 03 and 04 only), as described
      below
 3.   linearization of array addresses
 4.   algebraic simplification and reassociation of address expressions
 5.   loop-invariant code motion
 6.   strength reduction and induction-variable removal
 7.   global common-subexpression elimination
 8.   global copy and constant propagation
 9.   dead-code elimination
            The dependence-based analysis and transformation phase is designed to support
      parallelization and data-cache optimization and may be done (under control of a sep­
      arate option) when the optimization level selected is 03 or 04. The steps comprising
      it (in order) are as follows:
 1.   constant propagation
 2.   dead-code elimination
 3.   structural control-flow analysis
 4.   loop discovery (including determining the index variable, lower and upper bounds,
      and increment)
 5.   segregation of loops that have calls and early exits in their bodies
 6.   dependence analysis using the GCD and Banerjee-Wolfe tests, producing direction
      vectors and loop-carried scalar du- and ud-chains
 7.   loop distribution
 8.   loop interchange
 9.   loop fusion
10.   scalar replacement of array elements
11.   recognition of reductions
12.   data-cache tiling
13.   profitability analysis for parallel code generation
           After global optimization has been completed, the code generator first trans­
      lates the Sun IR code input to it to a representation called asm+ that consists of
712            Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends

               BLOCK: la b e l = s l_
                  loop le v e l * 0
                  expected execution frequency = 1
                  number of c a l l s w ithin = 0
                  a t t r ib u t e s : c c _ a lu _ p o ssib le
                  p red ece sso rs
                  su c c e sso rs
                          ENTRY ! 2 incoming r e g is t e r s
                          or          /#0gO,#/,iO ,#/,iO
                          or          /#,gO,#/ , i l , /#,il
               BLOCK: la b e l = .L77000081
                          or            ’
                                        /.gO.'/.il ,*/,rll8
                          or            y.go,y,io,y,rii9
                          add             y.rll9,-2004,y.rl30
                          ba             .L77000088
                          nop
               BLOCK: la b e l = .L77000076
                          add             y.rl25,500,y.rl25
                          add             y,rl24,l,y,rl24
                          cmp             y.rl24,y,rl32
                          bg             .L77000078
                          nop
                          ba             .L77000085
                          nop
               BLOCK: la b e l = .L77000078
                          add             y,rl31,500,y,rl31
                          add             •/.rl33,l,y.rl33
                          cmp             y.rl33,y.rl34
                        *>g       .L77000080
                        nop
                        ba        .L77000087
                        nop

  FIG . 21.5   asm+ code corresponding to lines 9 through 12 of the Fortran 77 program in Figure 21.2.


               assem bly-language instructions plus structures that represent control-flow and data-
               dependence inform ation. Figure 2 1 .5 show s the asm+ code, as produced by the ex ­
               pander phase at the beginning o f code generation, corresponding to lines 9 through
               12 o f the Fortran 7 7 code in Figure 2 1 .2 . We have elided the annotations that would
               follow all but the first BLOCK entry. The instructions are all ordinary s p a r c instruc­
               tions except ENTRY, which is a higher-level operator that represents the entry-point
               code. N o te that register num bers o f the form °/0r nnn denote sym bolic registers.
                    The code generator then perform s a series o f phases, in the follow ing order:

         1.    instruction selection

         2.    inlining o f assem bly-language tem plates w hose com putational im pact is understood
               (02 and above)

         3.    local optim izations, including dead-code elim ination, straightening, branch chain­
               ing, m oving s e t h i s out o f loop s, replacem ent o f branching code sequences by
      Section 21.1     The Sun Compilers for SPARC                                          713

      branchless machine idioms, and commoning of condition-code setting (02 and
      above)
 4.   macro expansion, phase 1 (expanding of switches and a few other constructs)
 5.   data-flow analysis of live values (02 and above)
 6.   software pipelining and loop unrolling (03 and above)
 7.   early instruction scheduling (04 only)
 8.   register allocation by graph coloring (02 and above)
 9.   stack frame layout
10.   macro expansion, phase 2 (expanding of memory-to-memory moves, max, min,
      comparison for value, entry, exit, etc.); entry expansion includes accommodating
      leaf routines and generation of position-independent code
11.   delay-slot filling
12.   late instruction scheduling
13.   inlining of assembly-language templates whose computational impact is not under­
      stood (02 and above)
14.   macro expansion, phase 3 (to simplify code emission)
15.   emission of the relocatable object code

      For 01 optimization, register allocation is done by a local cost-based method like the
      one described in Section 16.2.
           The Sun compiling system provides for both static (pre-execution) and dynamic
      (run-time) linking. Selection of static or dynamic linking, or some of each, is done
      by a link-time option.
           The sparc assembly code shown in Figure 21.6 is the listing that results from
      compiling the C routine in Figure 21.1 with 04 optimization. Note that the constant
      value of kind has been propagated into the conditional and the dead code has been
      eliminated (except for loading the value 3.14 stored at .L_const_seg_900000101
      and storing it at °/0f p-8), the loop invariant len gth * width has been removed from
      the loop, the loop has been unrolled by a factor of four, the multiplication by height
      has been strength-reduced to additions, the local variables have been allocated to
      registers, instruction scheduling has been performed, and the tail call to p ro c e ss ( )
      has been optimized. On the other hand, some of the instructions preceding the first
      loop are unnecessary, and the accumulation of a re a could have been turned into
      a single multiplication. Also, it is somewhat strange that the loop-unrolling criteria
      result in the first eight iterations’ being unrolled, but not the last two.
           The sparc assembly code shown in Figure 21.7 is the listing of the assembly
      code produced by the Sun Fortran 77 compiler for the main routine in the program
      in Figure 21.2 with 04 optimization (we have elided the code produced for the
      initialization loops and left only the code produced for the call to s l ( ), which has
      been inlined automatically). Since s i ( ) has been inlined, the compiler can make use
      of the information that the value of n is 500, which it does in unrolling the innermost
714            Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends

                            sethi   ’/.hi(length) ,’            /.o0
                            sethi   ’/.hi(width) ,’           /.ol
                            sethi   ’/.hi(.L_const_seg_900000101) ,’            /.o2
                            Id       [7,o0+’    /,lo(length)] ,*/,o0
                            Id       [*/,ol+’   /.lo(width) ] ,’      /.ol
                            or      */.g0,0,7,il
                            ldd      [*/.o2+7,lo(.L_const_seg_900000101)] ,'/,f0
                            smul    7.oO,7.ol,7,oO
                            std     ’/ .fO . [’/ .f p - 8 ]
                            or      7.g0,0,7,10
                            or      '/.gO,0,7,11
                            add     7.il,7.11,7.il
                            add     7.10,1,7.10
                            or      7.g0,0,’      /.i0
               .L900000111: add      •/.ll,7.oO,7.ol
                            add      7.o 1 ,7 . o 0 , ’/ .o 2
                            add      ’
                                     /.il,7.ol,7.ol
                            add      7.o 1,7 . o 2 , ’/ .o 1
                            add      ’
                                     /.o2,’  /.oO,7.o2
                            add      */.iO,7.oO,7.o3
                            add      7.o 2 ,7 . o 0 ,7 .1 1
                            add      7.ol,7.o2,7.ol
                            add      •/.o3,’ /.oO,’    /.o3
                            cmp      7.10,3
                            add      •/.ol,7.11,7.il
                            add      7.o3,*/.o0,*/.o3
                            add      7.10,4,7.10
                            bl        •L900000111
                            add      7.03,’  /.oO,’    /.iO
               .L900000112: add      7.11,7.00,7.11
                            cmp      7.10,10
                            bge       •L77000021
                            add      7.iO,’  /.oO,7.iO
               .L77000015:  add      7.il,7.1l,*/.il
                            add      7.10,1,7.10
                            add      7.11,7.00,7.11
                            cmp      7.10,10
                            bl        •L77000015
                            add      7.iO,’  /.oO,7.iO
               .L77000021:  call     process,2                    ! (tail call)
                            restore 7.gO,7.gO,’        /.gO

  FIG . 21.6   sparc assembly code corresponding to the machine code produced by the Sun C compiler
               with 04 optimization for the program in Figure 21.1.


               loop by a factor o f four and producing no rolled copy. The unrolled loop, which
               extends from label .L 9 00000112 to . L900000113, includes eight loads, four stores,
               seven ad d s, a com pare, and a branch, which is minimal for that unrolling factor,
               except that linear-function test replacem ent could have elim inated one o f the adds.
               The local variables have been allocated to registers and the loop has been softw are
                Section 21.1     The Sun Compilers for SPARC                                       715


                MAIN_:         save    •/.sp,-120//.sp

                .L77000057: sethi      "/.hi(GPB.MAIN.a) //.ol
                            add        %o 1,’ /.lo(GPB.MAIN.a) //.ol
                            or         •/.g0,-2004//.o2
                            add        y,o2,y,oi,’  /,gi
                            or         y.go,i,y.o5
                            or         y.go,5oo,y.o7
                .L77000043: add        y.o5,i,yai
                            cmp        y.ii,5oo
                            bg          .L77000047
                            sll        y.n,5,y.oi
                            sub        y.oi,y.n,y.oi
                            sll        %oi)2,y.oi
                            add        •/.n,y.oi,y.oi
                            sll        y.oi,2,y.io
                .L77000044: add        y.o7,i,y.o2
                            add        •/.io,i,y,oi
                            sll        y.o2,2,y.o2
                            add        y.gi,y.o2 ,y.i2
                            sll        y,oi,2,y.oi
                            or         y.go,i,y.i3
                            Id          [*/.12] //.o2
                            add        y.i2,4,y.i2
                            add        y.gi,y.oi,y.oo
                            add        y.i3,i,y.i3
                .L900000112:Id          [•/.o0] //.ol
                            cmp        y.13,493
                            add        y.o2//.ol//.ol
                            St         y.oi,[y.oo]
                            add        y.oO,16//.oO
                            Id          rei2],y,02
                            Id          [•/.O0-12] ,y,o3
                            add        y.l2 ,16//,12
                            add        •/.02//.03//.02
                            St         y.02 ,[y.oo-12]
                            Id          [y.12-12] //.ol
                            add       1y.l3,4//.13
                                      —1
                                      o
                                      0
                            Id         1
                                      00           o
                            add        y.ol//.o4//.ol
                            St         •/.Ol, [y.oO-8]
                            Id          [5.12—8] ,y.o2
                            Id          [•/.O0-4] ,y,o3
                            add        •/.o2//.o3//.o2
                            St         •/.o2,[y.oO-4]
                            ble        .L900000112
                            Id          [5.12-4] //.o2

                                                                                         (co n tin u ed)

F IG . 2 1 .7   sparc assem bly code correspondin g to the m achine code produced by the Sun Fortran
                77 com piler with 04 optim ization for the m ain program in Figure 2 1 .2 .
716               Case Studies of Com pilers and Future Trends


                   L900000113: Id             [7.o0] ,7,ol
                               emp           */.13,500
                               add           V.o2,y.ol//.ol
                               St            */.oi, [y.oo]
                                 bg          .L77000046
                                 add         7o0,4,%o0
                   L 77000056: Id             [’
                                               /.12] ,7,ol
                                 add         7.13,1,7,13
                                 Id             oo       oCN
                                 emp         7.13,500
                                 add         7.o 1,7. o2 ,7 . o 1
                                 St          7.ol,[7.o0]
                                 add         7.12,4,7.12
                                 b le        •L77000056
                                 add         y.o0,4,7.o0
                   L 7 7 000046: add         7.11,1,7.11
                                 emp         7.11,500
                                 b le        .L77000044
                                 add         7.10,500,7.10
                   L 77000047: add           7.o5,l,7.o5
                                 emp         7.05,500
                                 b le        •L77000043
                                 add         7.o7,500,7.07
                   L 77000049: r e t
                                 re sto re   y.go,y.go,y.go

      FIG. 21.7   (continued)


                  pipelined (note the load just above the starting label of the loop). The temporaries
                  have been allocated in the loop in such a way as to maximize the freedom available
                  to scheduling. However, the compiler produces code for s i ( ) as well as for the main
                  routine, although this is unnecessary—the main routine manifestly calls only s l ( ),
                  which, in turn, calls no other routines.


21.2              The IBM XL Compilers for the POWER
                  and PowerPC Architectures
21.2.1            The POWER and PowerPC Architectures
                  The power architecture is an enhanced 32-bit Rise machine that consists of branch,
                  fixed-point, floating-point, and storage-control processors. Individual implementa­
                  tions may have multiple processors of each sort, except that the registers are shared
                  among them and there may be only one branch processor in a system.
                       The branch processor includes the condition, link, and count registers and exe­
                  cutes conditional and unconditional branches and calls, system calls, and condition-
                  register move and logical operations. The condition register consists of eight 4-bit
                  condition fields, one of which is set by selected fixed-point instructions and another
                  by floating-point instructions. The other condition fields can be used to save multiple
Section 21.2    The IBM X L Compilers for the POWER and PowerPC Architectures       717


conditions, and all may be used to control branching. The link register is used pri­
marily to hold the return address for calls and the count register to control looping,
and both may be copied to and from integer registers.
     The fixed-point processor contains 32 32-bit integer registers, with register grO
delivering the value zero when used as an operand in an address computation, in­
cluding in the load address instruction. The fixed-point unit has two basic addressing
modes, register + register and register + displacement, plus the capability to update
the base register with the computed address. It implements loads and stores (includ­
ing forms that operate on halfwords with byte reversal, on multiple words, and on
strings), arithmetic, logical, compare, shift, rotate, and trap instructions; and system-
control instructions.
     The floating-point processor has 32 64-bit data registers and implements the
ansi /ieee floating-point standard for double-precision values only. It includes loads
and stores, arithmetic instructions, convert to and from integer and single precision,
compare, and some specialized operations that do a multiply followed by an add or
a subtract without intermediate rounding.
     The storage-control processor provides for segmented main storage, interfaces
with caches and the translation-lookaside buffer, and does virtual address transla­
tion.
     The PowerPC architecture is a nearly upward-compatible extension of power
that allows for 32- and 64-bit implementations. A 64-bit implementation always al­
lows both 64-bit and 32-bit modes of operation that differ in how effective addresses
are computed and in the presence of a series of instructions. A PowerPC processor
consists of branch, fixed-point, and floating-point processors and, as in pow er , a
system may have one or several fixed-point and floating-point processors, but only
one branch processor.
     The branch processor has a 32-bit condition register and 64-bit link and count
registers and provides essentially the same facilities as in pow er .
     The fixed-point processor has 32 64-bit integer registers, with grO functioning as
in power . It includes the same addressing modes as pow er . It implements the same
categories of instructions as the power fixed-point unit, plus the storage-control
instructions, except that some troublesome corner cases (such as using the base
register as the target of a load with update, or doing a load multiple that includes
the base register as a target) have been made invalid. A few instructions have been
eliminated because they are difficult to implement, such as difference or zero (useful
in computing maximum and minimum) and rotate left then mask insert, and others
because of the change to 64-bit operation. Some new instructions have been added,
many of them to deal with caches and translation-lookaside buffers.
     The PowerPC floating-point processor has 32 64-bit data registers and imple­
ments the an si /ieee standard for both single- and double-precision values. Aside
from new instructions to deal with the 32-bit format, the instruction set is virtually
identical to pow er ’s .
     power and PowerPC instructions typically have three operands— two sources
and one result. The first source and result are almost always registers, and the second
source may be a register or a small constant. In the assembly language, the operand
order is result, first source, and then second source. See Appendix A.2 for further
description of the assembly language.
718          C ase Studies of Com pilers and Future Trends




  FIG. 21.8 IBM XL compiler structure.



21.2.2       The XL Compilers
             IBM ’s compilers for the p o w e r and PowerPC architectures are known as the X L
             family and include compilers for PL.8, C, Fortran 77, Pascal, and C++, all but the
             first of which are available to customers. They originated from a project started in
             1983 to provide compilers for an IBM Rise architecture that was an intermediate
             stage between the IBM 801 and p o w e r , but that was never released as a product.
             However, the first compilers based on the X L technology were, in fact, an optimizing
             Fortran compiler for the PC RT that was released to a selected few customers and a C
             compiler for the PC RT used only for internal IBM development. The compilers were
             written with interchangeable back ends, so as to target the IBM 370 architecture,
             the unreleased architecture mentioned above, the PC RT, p o w e r , the Intel 386
             architecture, s p a r c , and, more recently, PowerPC.
                  The structure of the X L compilers, which follows the low-level model of opti­
             mization, is shown in Figure 21.8. Each compiler consists of a front end called a
             translator, a global optimizer, an instruction scheduler, a register allocator, an in­
             struction selector, and a phase called final assembly that produces the relocatable
             image and assembly-language listings. In addition, there is a module called root ser­
             vices that interacts with all the phases and serves to make the compilers compatible
             with multiple operating systems by, e.g., compartmentalizing information about how
             to produce listings and error messages. A disassembler is provided separately to en-
     Section 21.2    The IBM XL Compilers for the POWER and PowerPC Architectures        719


     able production of assembly language from relocatables. The compilers are written
     in PL.8.
          A translator converts the source language to an intermediate form called XIL by
     calling XIL library routines. The XIL generation routines do not merely generate in­
     structions; they may, for example, generate a constant in place of an instruction that
     would compute the constant. A translator may consist of a front end that translates a
     source language to a different intermediate language, followed by a translator from
     the other intermediate form to XIL. The C translator for the System/370 does this,
     as do the C++ translators for the 370, p o w e r , and PowerPC, all of which translate
     to the 370 intermediate language first.
          The compiler back end (all the phases except the source-to-XIL translator) is
     named t o b e y , an acronym for TOronto Back End with Yorktown, indicating the
     heritage of the back end as derived from the PL.8 compiler for the 801 and prerelease
     p o w e r systems development, although almost every module has since been changed

     significantly or replaced.
          The XIL for a compilation unit consists of a p ro ced u re d escrip to r table that
     consists of information about each procedure, such as the size of its stack frame and
     information about global variables it affects, and a pointer to the representation
     of its code. The code representation consists of a p ro ced u re list that comprises
     pointers to the XIL structures that represent instructions, which are quite low level
     and source-language-independent. Each instruction is represented by an entry in
     the com pu tation table or CT, which is an array of variable-length records that
     represent preorder traversals of the intermediate code for the instructions. Identical
     instructions in a procedure share the same CT entry. Each CT entry consists of an
     opcode followed by a variable number of operands, which may be integers in the
     range 0 through 2 16 — 1, indexes into tables of large and negative integers, floating­
     point numbers, register numbers, labels, symbol-table references, etc. The opcode
     may be a Rise-style operation, a load or store, a synthetic operator (such as MAX
     or MIN), an administrative operator (e.g., procedure header or block begin), or a
     control-flow operator, including unconditional, conditional, and multiway forms
     (the last comprising a selector and a label list). Variables and intermediate results are
     represented by symbolic registers, each of which comprises an entry in the sy m bo lic
     register tab le ; each such entry points to the CT entry that defines it. Figure 21.9
     shows the relationship among the procedure list, CT, and symbolic register table.
          Figure 21.10 gives an example of the external representation of the XIL code
     produced by the C translator for the first part of the code in Figure 21.1. Note
     that the external representation leaves much of the structure of the code implicit
     or unrepresented. The meanings of the opcodes are as follows:

1.   PROC - procedure entry point
2.   ST4A - store word instruction
3.   L4A - load word instruction
4.   C4 - compare word instruction
5.   BF - branch on false instruction
720           Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


                                                                                         Symbolic
              Procedure list                 Computation table (CT)                    register table




  FIG. 21.9 Structure of the XIL for a procedure.

         6.   M- multiply instruction
         7.   A - add instruction
         8.   B - unconditional branch instruction
              An operand of the form . v ariab le represents the address of variab le , g r n represents
              symbolic register w, and c m represents symbolic condition register n.
                  Loads and stores in XIL have fully elaborated addresses. For example, a general
              load word instruction has a form that can be thought of as
                   L4A     regmame (rbase, rdisp, rindex, . . . )
              To generate 370 code from this, the rb a se , rd isp , and rindex components would
              all be used, as long as 0 < rd isp < 2 12; if the inequality is not satisfied, additional
              instructions would be generated to put rd isp + rin dex or rb ase + rd isp into a reg­
              ister first. To generate power code, either rb ase + rd isp (if 0 < rd isp < 2 16) or
              rb a se + rin dex would be used, if the other component is zero, or additional instruc­
              tions would be generated to combine components first. The optimizer is responsible
              for making sure that the instruction selector can generate legal instructions for the
              selected target architecture.
                    In addition to MAX and MIN, XIL includes a byte concatenate operator that takes
              an arbitrary number of operands, a multiplication operator, a division operator, etc.
              The optimizer turns MAX and MIN operators into a form from which the power-
              targeted instruction selector can generate corresponding two-instruction branchless
              sequences. The multiplication operator generates either a sequence of shifts, adds,
              and subtracts or a hardware multiply instruction, whichever is more efficient for the
              given operands and target. Divisions by 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 25, 125, and products of these
              integers with powers of two generate a long multiply and a doubleword shift; other
              divisors produce a divide operation.
             Section 21.2    The IBM XL Compilers for the POWER and PowerPC Architectures     721

                      PROC
                      ST4A     area(grauto,0)=0
                      ST4A     volume(grauto,0)=0
                      ST4A     kind(grauto,0)=0
                      ST4A     height(grauto,0)=0
                      L4A      gr315=he ight (grauto,0)
                      C4       cr316=gr315,10
                      BF       CL.2,cr316,Oxl/lt
            CL. 1:    L4A      gr317=kind(grauto,0)
                      C4       cr318=gr317,0
                      BF       CL.3,cr318,0x4/eq
                      L4A      gr319=area(grauto,0)
                      L4A      gr314=.length(gr2,0)
                      L4A      gr320=length(gr314,0)
                      L4A      gr313-.width(gr2,0)
                      L4A      gr321=width(gr313,0)
                      M        gr322=gr320,gr321
                      A        gr323=gr319,gr322
                      ST4A     area(grauto,0)=gr323
                      L4A      gr324=volume(grauto,0)
                      L4A      gr320=length(gr314,0)
                      L4A      gr321=width(gr313,0)
                      M        gr322=gr320,gr321
                      L4A      gr315=height(grauto,0)
                      M        gr325=gr315,gr322
                      A        gr326=gr324,gr325
                      ST4A     volume(grauto,0)=gr326
                      B        CL.4

FIG. 21.10 XIL code for lines 1 through 10 of the C program in Figure 21.1.


                 The compiler back end uses a second intermediate language, called YIL, for
            storage-related optimization and may use it for parallelization in the future. The
            YIL for a procedure is generated by t o b e y from its XIL and includes, in addition to
            the structures in XIL, representations for looping constructs, assignment statements,
            subscripting operations, and conditional control flow at the level of if statements. It
            also represents the code in SSA form. The goal, of course, is to produce code that is
            appropriate for dependence analysis and loop transformations. After such analysis
            and transformations have been performed, the YIL is translated back to XIL.
                 Alias information is provided by the language-specific translators to the opti­
            mizer by calls from the optimizer to front-end routines. No further analysis is done
            beyond what each language definition provides.
                 Control-flow analysis is straightforward. It identifies basic-block boundaries
            within a procedure, builds the flowgraph, constructs a depth-first search tree of the
            flowgraph, and divides it into intervals. The basic-block structure is recorded in a
            table indexed by the basic-block number that includes, for each block, pointers to
            the first and last entries in the procedure list for the block and lists of the block
            numbers of this block’s predecessors and successors.
722         Case Studies of Com pilers and Future Trends


                Data-flow analysis is done by interval analysis, with iteration used for irre­
            ducible intervals, and the data-flow information is recorded in bit vectors. For some
            optimizations, such as reassociation and strength reduction, the bit vectors are con­
            verted into du- and ud-chains. The live registers and du- and ud-chains are updated
            as needed during these phases.
                The optimizer does a series of transformations, as follows (in the order they are
            performed):

       1.   transforming multiway branches into sequences of compares and conditional
            branches or branches through a table of branches, according to the density of the
            labels
       2.   mapping local stack-allocated variables to register + offset addresses
       3.   inlining routines from the current compilation module, if requested and if warranted
            by several heuristic criteria
       4.   a very aggressive version of value numbering (more advanced than any published
            form)
       5.   global common-subexpression elimination
       6.   loop-invariant code motion
       7.   downward store motion
       8.   dead-store elimination
       9.   reassociation (see Section 12.3.1), strength reduction, and generation of update
            forms of the load and store instructions for p o w e r and PowerPC
      10.   global constant propagation
      11.   dead-code elimination
      12.   some architecture-specific optimizations known informally as “ wand waving,” such
            as converting MAX and MIN into branchless sequences
      13.   expansion of macro operators, i.e., lowering all opcodes and addressing expressions
            to ones supported by the target machine, turning calls into instruction sequences to
            address the parameters and to perform the call, turning large integer constants into
            sequences of instructions that generate their values, etc.
      14.   value numbering
      15.   global common-subexpression elimination
      16.   dead-code elimination
      17.   elimination of dead induction variables, including floating-point variables

            Floating-point divisions are turned into three-instruction sequences that include a
            multiply and an add. If bounds checking is turned on in a Fortran 77 compilation,
            trap-motion analysis and code motion are done immediately after the reassociation
            and strength-reduction pass.
             Section 21.2      The IBM XL Compilers for the POWER and PowerPC Architectures 723


             s      rx=ry,2            s.    rx=ry,2

             ci     cc0=ry,2           bt    label
             bt     label
             (a)                       (b)
FIG. 21.11 An example of coalescing condition-code setting with an arithmetic operation in p o w e r .
           The ci in (a) has been absorbed into the s . in (b) by setting its record bit.


                   t o b e y includes two register allocators, a “ quick and dirty” local one, used when

             optimization is not requested, and a graph-coloring global one based on Chaitin’s,
             but with spilling done in the style of Briggs’s work (see Section 16.3). A phase
             just before register allocation elaborates procedure prologues and epilogues and
             performs tail-call simplification and leaf-routine optimization. The graph-coloring
             register allocator also does “s c a v e n g i n g i.e., a version of value numbering that
             moves loads and stores of spilled temporaries out of loops. The allocator tries
             all three of the spill-code choice heuristics discussed in Section 16.3.12 for each
             procedure and uses the best of them for it.
                   The instruction scheduler is described in several papers (see Section 21.7). In
             addition to basic-block and branch scheduling, it does a type of global scheduling
             that works on acyclic flowgraphs and that uses program dependence graphs (see Sec­
             tion 9.5) to describe the constraints on scheduling. During optimizing compilations,
             it is run before register allocation (with symbolic registers) and, if any spill code has
             been generated, the local form is run again after register allocation.
                   The final assembly phase does two passes over the XIL, one pass to do a few
             peephole optimizations, such as coalescing condition-code setting done by com­
             pares with corresponding arithmetic operations and removing the compares (see
             Figure 21.11 for an example), and the other pass to output the relocatable image
             and listings. Final assembly calls routines in the language-specific translator to ob­
             tain debugging information to include in the relocatable.
                   Figure 21.12 shows the p o w e r assembly code produced by the X L disassembler
             from the object code resulting from compiling the program in Figure 21.1 with
             the X L C compiler with 03 optimization. The constant value of kind has been
             propagated into the conditional and the dead code eliminated; the loop invariant
             len gth * width has been removed from the loop; the loop has been unrolled by a
             factor of two; the local variables have been allocated to registers; and instruction
             scheduling has been performed. On the other hand, the tail call to p ro c e ss ( ) has
             not been optimized, and the accumulation of a re a has not been turned into a single
             multiplication.
                   Figure 21.13 shows the p o w e r assembly code produced by the X L disassembler
             from the object code resulting from compiling the routine s i ( ) in Figure 21.2 with
             the X L Fortran compiler with 03 optimization. The routine s l ( ) has not been
             inlined. The inner loop has been unrolled by a factor of two (from la b e l_Lfc
             through the next be instruction). The unrolled loop includes four loads (two with
             update), two stores with update, two adds, and a branch, which is minimal for
             the p o w e r architecture. The local variables have been allocated to registers and
             instruction scheduling has been performed.
724               Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends

                  .main:mfspr rO,LR
                        1      r5,T.22.width(RTOC)
                        stu    SP,-64(SP)
                        1      r4,T.26.length(RTOC)
                        St     rO,72(SP)
                        1      r0,0(r4)
                        1      r5,0(r5)
                        cal    r4,5(r0)
                        muls   r0,r0,r5
                        cal    r3,0(r0)
                        mtspr CTR,r4
                        cal    r4,0(r3)
                        cal    r5,0(r3)
                  _L34: ai     r6,r5,1
                        a      r3,r3,r0
                        muls  r5,r5,r0
                        a      r4,r4,r5
                        muls  r5,r6,r0
                        a     r4,r4,r5
                        a     r3,r3,r0
                        ai    r5,r6,1
                        be    BO.dCTR.NZERO,CRO.LT,__L34
                        bl     .processPR
                        cror  CR3.S0,CR3.S0,CR3.S0
                        1     rl2,72(SP)
                        ai     SP,SP,64
                        mtspr LR,rl2
                        bcr   B0_ALWAYS,CRO.LT

 FIG . 2 1 .1 2   po w er assembly code produced by the X L disassembler from the object code resulting
                  from compiling the program in Figure 21.1 with the X L C compiler with 03 optimization.

                  .si:     1        rl0,0(r4)
                           St       r31,-4(SP)
                           cal      r8,0(rl0)
                           cmpi     1,r8,0
                           be       B0.IF.N0T,CR1.FEX,__Lla4
                           ai       r6,rl0,-l
                           cal      rl2,0(r6)
                           cmpi     0,rl2,0
                           ai       r7,r3,1996
                           ai       r9,r3,-4
                           cal      rll,2(r0)
                           be       BO.IF.NOT,CRO.GT,__L154
                           rlinm    r3,rl0,31,l,31
                           rlinm.   r4,rl0,0,31,31
                           cmpi     l,r 3 ,0

 FIG . 21.13      po w er assembly code produced by the X L disassembler from the object code resulting
                  from compiling the routine s l ( ) in Figure 21.2 with the X L Fortran compiler with 03
                  optimization.
                 Section 21.2   The IBM XL Compilers for the POWER and PowerPC Architectures 725
                        cal     r31,0(r7)
                        mtspr   CTR,r3
                 _Lee: ai       rl2,rl2,-l
                        cal     r5,0(r31)
                        cal     r4,0(r9)
                 _Lf8: be       B0_IF,CR1_VX,_L124
                 _Lfc: lu       r3,4(r4)
                        1       rO,4(r5)
                        a       r3,r3,r0
                        stu     r3,4(r5)
                        lu      r3,4(r4)
                        1       rO,4(r5)
                        a       r3,r3,r0
                        stu     r3,4(r5)
                        be      B0_dCTR_NZER0,CRO.LT,__Lf c
                        be      B0_IF,CR0_EQ,_L134
                 _L124: lu      r3,4(r4)
                        1       r4,4(r5)
                        a       r3,r3,r4
                        stu     r3,4(r5)
                 _L134: empi    0,rl2,0
                        ai      r31,r31,2000
                        be      B0.IF.N0T,CRO.GT,__L154
                        rlinm   r3,rl0,31,1,31
                        rlinm. r4,rl0,0,31,31
                        empi    1,r3,0
                        mtspr   CTR,r3
                        b       _Lee
                 _L154: ai.     r8,r8,-l
                        ai      r9,r9,2000
                        ai      r7,r7,2000
                        ai      rll,rll,1
                        ai      r6,r6,-l
                        be      B0_IF_N0T,CRO.GT,__L19c
                        cal     rl2,0(r6)
                        empi    0,rl2,0
                        be      BO.IF.NOT,CRO.GT,__L154
                        rlinm   r3,rl0,31,1,31
                        rlinm. r4,rl0,0,31,31
                        cal     r31,0(r7)
                        empi    1,r3,0
                        mtspr   CTR,r3
                        ai      rl2,rl2,-l
                        cal     r5,0(r31)
                        cal     r4,0(r9)
                        b       _Lf 8
                 _L19c: 1       r31,-4(SP)
                        ber     BO.ALWAYS,CRO.LT
                 _Lla4: ber    BO.ALWAYS,CRO.LT

E IG . 2 1 .13   (continued)
72 6     Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


21.3     Digital Equipment’s Compilers for Alpha
21.3.1   The Alpha Architecture
         Alpha is a totally new architecture that was designed by Digital Equipment to be
         the successor to its VAX and Mips-based systems. It is a very streamlined 64-bit Rise
         design. It has 32 64-bit integer registers (with r31 delivering a zero when used as
         a source and discarding results written to it) and 32 64-bit floating-point registers
         (with f31 functioning like r31). It has only a single addressing mode, namely, register
         + displacement, and no condition codes.
              The integer instructions include loads and stores; unconditional branches; con­
         ditional branches based on comparing the value in a register against zero; jumps
         that branch to and return from a subroutine and that branch between coroutines;
         arithmetic instructions (including adds and subtracts that scale one operand by four
         or eight); signed and unsigned compares that set a bit in a specified register; log­
         ical, shift, and conditional move instructions; and a rich set of byte-manipulation
         instructions to facilitate string handling.
              The floating-point design implements the a n s i / i e e e standard but requires a lot of
         assistance from operating-system software for the corner cases. It implements both
         VAX and a n s i / i e e e single- and double-precision formats and provides instructions
         that include loads and stores, branches, conditional move, both VAX and a n s i / i e e e
         arithmetic operations, and conversions among integer and the VAX formats on one
         hand and the a n s i / i e e e formats on the other.
              The system-control instructions provide prefetching hints, implement memory
         and trap barriers for the weak system storage model, and implement the so-called
         Privileged Architecture Library. The last of these is designed to provide facilities for
         an operating system that may vary from one system implementation to another.
              Alpha instructions typically have three operands—two sources and one result.
         The first source and result are almost always registers, and the second source may
         be a register or a small constant. In the assembly language, the operand order is
         result, first source, and then second source. See Appendix A.3 for further details of
         the assembly language.


21.3.2   The GEM Compilers for Alpha
         Digital Equipment’s effort to produce compilers for Alpha is known as the GEM
         Project.2 The name is not an acronym, despite being spelled uppercase, and is
         a carryover from the project that built the compilers for Prism, a previous DEC
         Rise effort that was never incorporated into a product. The GEM Project began
         about 1985 in parallel with several internal Rise developments. The need to provide
         compilers for several targets resulted in the GEM Project’s producing compilers that
         are easily retargeted and that already have been retargeted several times. Prism was
         tentatively selected to be DEC’S entry into the Rise market in 1987, and a GEM-
         based Fortran 77 compiler for it was available at that time. However, DEC soon


         2. The GEM Project also produces compilers for Digital’s VAX and Mips-based systems.
                  Section 21.3          Digital Equipment’s Compilers for Alpha                                     727
                                                              GEM shell




F IG . 2 1 .1 4   D E C A lp h a c o m p ile r stru ctu re.



                  switched to using the m ip s platform in its DECstation series, and work on retargeting
                  GEM-based compilers for it began in summer 1988, with a GEM-based Fortran 77
                  compiler being first shipped for Mips-based DECstations in March 1991.
                       Work on retargeting the GEM Fortran 77 compiler to Alpha began in November
                  1989. By summer 1990, the b l i s s compiler was complete.
                       The compilers available for Alpha at introduction included Fortran 77 with
                  VAX VMS and Un ix extensions, Fortran 90, a n s i C (with other dialect options),
                  C++, Ada, c o b o l , Pascal, PL/I, and b l i s s . The compilers are structured as shown in
                  Figure 21.14. A set of facilities called the GEM shell provides a common operating-
                  system interface that is compatible with VMS, Ultrix, o s f /i , and Windows NT; it
                  includes text input/output, diagnostic facilities, a language-sensitive editor, virtual
                  memory management, debugging tools, and a common look and feel for all the
                  compilers and environments.3 Each compiler has its own front end, but all other
                  components are shared. All compiler components are written in b l i s s , except the
                  C front end, which is written in C. b l i s s macros are used to generate operator-
                  signature tables for intermediate-language tuples and several other back-end tables.
                       In each compiler, the front end processes a file at a time, doing lexical, syn­
                  tactic, and static-semantic analyses and producing an intermediate form called CIL
                  (Compact Intermediate Language). All phases beyond the front end operate on a
                  procedure-by-procedure basis.
                       Both CIL and EIL (Expanded Intermediate Language) represent a compilation
                  unit as a doubly linked list of nodes. In CIL, the list corresponds to a compilation
                  unit and the nodes have a fixed size. Each node is a record with fields that represent


                  3. Actually, there are several versions of the GEM shell in existence, one for each of several pairs of
                  host operating systems and architectures, all providing the same facilities.
728                 Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


                    $1: f e t c h ( i )                                  $1:   sy m ref(; sym bol=i)
                                                                         $2:   f e t c h ( $ l)
                    $2: s u b s c r ( $ l , [ 4 ] , [ 0 ] ; p o sn =l)   $3:   l i t r e f ( ; lite r a l= [4 ])
                                                                         $4:   m u l($ l,$ 3 )
                    $3: a r e f ( x ,$ 2 )                               $5:   sy m ref( ; symbol=x)
                                                                         $6:   a p lu s($ 5 ,$ 4 )
                    $4: fe tc h ($ 3 )                                   $7:   fe tc h ($ 6 )
                                                                         $8:   sy m ref( ; symbol=a)
                    $5: s t o r e ( a , $4)                              $9:   s t o r e ($ 8 ,$ 7 )


                    (a)                                                  (b)
 F I G . 2 1 .1 5   (a) E x a m p le o f C IL co d e fo r the C statem en t a = x [ i ] , an d (b) its e x p a n sio n to E IL
                    co d e .


                    the node’s kind and subkind, flags, forward and backward links, attributes, and
                    pointers to its operand nodes. Several types of operators have comparatively high-
                    level representations; for example, fetching a variable’s value references the variable
                    by name, and subscript lists are represented by lists that contain the subscript
                    expressions and strides. Figure 21.15(a) shows the CIL form for the C statement
                    a = x [ i ] , with the minor subfields elided.
                         The compiler uses the mixed model of optimization, with code selection occur­
                    ring between the global optimizer and register allocation and instruction scheduling.
                    The first phase of the back end, the expander, translates CIL into the lower-level form
                    EIL. In EIL, the list of nodes corresponds to a procedure and the sizes of nodes are
                    variable. The nodes are tuples that represent operations with “ moderately strong”
                    machine typing. Each tuple consists of the operator, the operand and result types,
                    its operands, an attribute list, and forward and backward links to other tuples. In
                    comparison to CIL, the fetching of a variable’s value is expanded in EIL to a symbol
                    reference and a fetch through the symbol reference, and a subscript list is represented
                    by a series of tuples that evaluate the subscript’s linear form. Another example of the
                    expansion in going from CIL to EIL is for procedure calls: in CIL, they are repre­
                    sented by elaborate tuples that describe the argument list and how each argument is
                    to be passed and the result to be received, while in EIL, the argument list is expanded
                    to a series of tuples that actually evaluate the arguments. EIL also includes nodes de­
                    signed specifically for the optimizer, such as c s e r e f nodes, which represent uses of
                    common subexpressions. Figure 21.15(b) shows the EIL code that is produced by the
                    expander for the CIL code shown in Figure 21.15(a), again with the minor subfields
                    elided.
                         The compilers provide six optimization levels, as follows:
             00     This level does only peephole optimization and assigns each local variable to a
                    distinct stack location.
             01     This level produces code that is intended to be debuggable; it does local common-
                    subexpression elimination and lifetime analysis that results in variables sharing stack
                    locations and registers.
             02     This level adds classic global optimizations that don’t significantly increase code size.
     Section 21.3     Digital Equipment’s Compilers for Alpha                        729

03   This level adds loop unrolling and code replication to remove branches (the inverse
     of tail merging).
04   This level adds inlining of routines from within the same compilation unit.
05   This level adds dependence analysis and software pipelining.
     Starting with level 01, the expander does interprocedural analysis to determine the
     call graph insofar as it can and does inlining of procedures within the same compila­
     tion unit. The procedures that make up the compilation unit are then optimized and
     have code generated for them a procedure at a time, from the leaves of the call tree
     toward its root.
          The optimizer first constructs the flowgraph of the routine and its dominator
     tree, eliminating empty blocks, unreachable code, and unnecessary branches in the
     process. The list of basic blocks is sorted into “ loop order,” which resembles the
     depth-first search tree but keeps the blocks in the body of each loop contiguous
     to improve code locality. An empty preheader is inserted before each loop and a
     corresponding block after each loop. Also, while loops are turned into re p e a t
     loops, since the invariant-code motion phase is not designed to move code out of
     while loops. Data-flow analysis is done using the symbolic evaluation method of
     Reif and Lewis ([ReiL77] and [ReiL86]) but without constructing their global value
     graph. Alias analysis is done in two phases. The first phase, done before data-flow
     analysis, annotates data-access nodes with symbol access information and possible
     aliases. The second phase, done during data-flow analysis, traverses the dominator
     tree up and down to compute bit vectors that represent the potential side effects of
     assignments.
          A series of peephole optimizations is done at three points in the optimization
     process: before control-flow analysis, after data-flow analysis, and at the end of
     optimization. These include algebraic simplifications, expanding multiplications and
     divisions by constants, expanding bit- and byte-field accesses to word fetches and
     extracts and the corresponding expansions for bit- and byte-field stores, and several
     others.
          The global optimizations performed include the following:
1.   induction-variable strength reduction
2.   linear-function test replacement
3.   loop unrolling
4.   global common-subexpression elimination, including determination of those that are
     better recomputed than performed in common
5.   loop-invariant code motion
6.   global copy and constant propagation
7.   dead-store elimination
8.   base binding, i.e., determining address expressions that differ by a constant small
     enough to fit in the displacement field of a load or store
9.   software pipelining
730        Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


                The code generator’s design was inspired by the work of Wulf et al. [WulJ75] in
           the Production-Quality Compiler Compiler (PQCC) and the PDP-11 b l i s s compiler.
           It consists of six phases, as follows:

      1.   Context 1 tiles the EIL tree for a procedure with code patterns, each with a cost per
           node. There may be several patterns for a particular part of a procedure’s EIL tree—
           in practice, there are about five or six applicable patterns per node. Then Context 1
           selects the set of patterns with minimal cost for the whole tree.
      2.   IL Scheduling next interleaves the selected code patterns for a basic block with
           each other sufficiently to produce high-quality register allocation. It also uses Sethi-
           Ullman numbers to compute the minimum number of registers that are required by
           each expression.
      3.   Next, Context 2 creates temporaries for the quantities that need them and computes
           their lifetimes.
      4.   Then Register History tracks the reloading of each temporary that has been allocated
           a memory location, annotating temporaries that have multiple uses so that they can
           be allocated to the same register.
      5.   TN Pack does bin packing of temporary names (as described in Section 16.2) to
           allocate registers, as determined by the actions contained in the patterns selected by
           Context 1.
      6.   Finally, Code emits the actual object code, based on the selected patterns and register
           allocation.

           The code generator combines the code for the procedures in a compilation unit
           to produce a relocatable object module and determines where (short-displacement)
           branches can be used and where jumps are required.
               Finally, the final phase of the compiler does peephole optimizations, such as ma­
           chine idioms, jump simplifications, cross jumping, and code duplication (i.e., inverse
           cross jumping); and instruction scheduling using a detailed machine model and an
           algorithm that is based on determination of critical paths in straight-line code. The
           scheduler does some cross-block scheduling for safe speculative execution.4
               Feedback of profiling results can be used to guide procedure integration and
           the order of the generated basic blocks and to tailor the calling conventions for
           frequently called routines.
               Figure 21.16 shows the assembly code that is produced by the GEM C compiler
           with 05 optimization for the routine shown in Figure 21.1. Note that the constant
           value of kind has been propagated into the conditional and the dead code elimi­
           nated; the loop invariant len gth * width has been removed from the loop; the loop


           4. Execution of an instruction in a particular block is speculative if the instruction originated from a
           following block with an intervening conditional. The speculative execution is safe if taking the other
           arm of the conditional does not require compensating for the effect of the speculatively executed
           instruction.
            Section 21.3    Digital Equipment’s Compilers for Alpha                     731

            main:    ldah   gp,(r27)
                     Ida    gP.(gp)
                     ldq    rl,8(gp)
                     Ida    sp,-16(sp)
                     ldq    rO,16(gp)
                     clr    rl6
                     stq    r26,(sp)
                     clr    rl7
                     ldl    rl,(rl)
                     ldl    rO,(rO)
                     mull   r0,rl,r0
                     clr    rl
            L$3:     mull   rl,r0,r2
                     ldq    r27,(gp)
                     addl   rl,1,r3
                     addl   rl,2,r4
                     addl   rl,3,r5
                     addl   rl,4,r6
                     addl   rl6,r0,rl6
                     addl   rl6,r0,rl6
                     addl   rl6,r0,rl6
                     addl   rl,5,rl
                     addl   rl6,0,rl6
                     addl   rl6,r0,rl6
                     mull   r3,r0,r3
                     addl   rl7,r2,r2
                     mull   r4,rO,r4
                     addl   r2,r3,r2
                     addq   rl,-10,r3
                     mull   r5,r0,r5
                     addl   r2,r4,r2
                     mull   r6,r0,r6
                     addl   r2,r5,r2
                     addl   r2,r6,rl7
                     bit    r3,L$3
                     jsr    r26,r27
                     ldah   gp,(r26)
                     ldq    r26,(sp)
                     Ida    gp.Cgp)
                     clr    rO
                     Ida    sp,16(sp)
                     ret    r26

FIG. 21.16 Alpha assembly language produced by the GEM C compiler with 05 optimization for
           the routine in Figure 21.1.
732          Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


                      ldl       rl7,(rl7)
                      mov       1 ,r0
                      mov       2,rl
                      ble       rl7,L$4
                      mov       rl,r2
                      cmple     r2,rl7,r3
                      beq       r3,L$7
                      nop
                      sll       r2,4,r3
                      ble       rl7,L$13
                      sll       r2,11,r5
                      s4subq    r3,r3,r3
                      subq      r5,r3,r3
                      sll       r0,4,r5
                      sll       rO,11,r6
                      s4subq    r5,r5,r5
                      subq      r6,r5,r5
                      subl      rl7,3,r6
                      addq      rl6,r3,r3
                      addq      rl6,r5,r5
                      cmplt     rl7,r6,r7
                      mov       1 ,r4
                      Ida       r3,-2000(r3)
                      Ida       r5,-2000(r5)
                      bne       r7,L$24
                      ble       r6,L$24

 FIG. 21.17 Alpha assembly language produced by the GEM Fortran 77 compiler with 05
            optimization for the routine s l ( ) in Figure 21.2.


             has been unrolled by a factor of five; all the local variables have been allocated to
             registers; and instruction scheduling has been performed, including the safe specula­
             tive scheduling of the load of r27 in the instruction following the label L$3 from the
             following block. On the other hand, the allocation of the stack frame is unnecessary,
             the computation of a re a could have been reduced to a single multiplication, and the
             tail call to p ro ce ss ( ) has not been optimized. Also, the multiplications to compute
             the terms that are added to produce volume could have been strength-reduced to
             additions.
                  Figure 21.17 shows the assembly language that is produced by the GEM For­
             tran 77 compiler with 05 optimization for the routine s l ( ) in Figure 21.2. The
             code from s l_ to L$21 is initialization code for the routine and the loops, and the
             code from L$13 on is loop control for the outer loops and finalization code. The
             remaining code is for the innermost loop. It has been unrolled by a factor of four
             (the code beginning with L$21) and a rolled copy has also been produced, beginning
             at L$24. In the rolled loop, there are nine instructions, since linear-function test re­
             placement has not been performed. The unrolled loop consists of 21 instructions, of
             which only one is inessential, again because linear-function test replacement has not
             been performed. The local variables have been allocated to registers and instruction
            Section 21.3     Digital Equipment’s Compilers for Alpha                      733


            L$21:    ldl       r8,(rS)
                     addl      r4,4,r4
                     ldl       rl9,(r3)
                     addl      r8,rl9,r8
                     stl       r8,(r3)
                     ldl       rl9,4(rS)
                     ldl       r8,4(r3)
                     addl      rl9,r8,r8
                     stl       r8,4(r3)
                     ldl       rl9,8(r5)
                     ldl       r8,8(r3)
                     addl      rl9,r8,r8
                     stl       r8,8(r3)
                     ldl       rl9,12(r5)
                     ldl       r8,12(r3)
                     Ida       r3,16(r3)
                     Ida       r5,16(r5)
                     addl      rl9,r8,r8
                     cmple     r4,r6,rl9
                     stl       r8,-4(r3)
                     bne       rl9,L$21
                     cmple     r4,rl7,r8
                     beq       r8,L$13
                     nop
            L$24:    ldl       r7,(r5)
                     addl      r4,l,r4
                     ldl       rl9,(r3)
                     Ida       r3,4(r3)
                     cmple     r4,rl7,r8
                     Ida       r5,4(r5)
                     addl      r7,rl9,r7
                     stl       r7,-4(r3)
                     bne       r8,L$24
            L$13:    addl      r2,1,r2
                     cmple     r2,rl7,rl9
                     bne       rl9,L$8
            L$7:     addl      rO,1,rO
                     cmple     r0,rl7,r7
                     addl      rl.l.rl
                     bne       r7,L$5
            L$4:     ret       r26

FIG. 21.17 (continued)


            scheduling has been performed. On the other hand, procedure integration of s l ( )
            into the main program has not been performed. Doing so would have saved the call
            and return overhead and would have propagated the value of n (= 500) into the sub­
            routine, making the rolled copy of the innermost loop unnecessary, since 4 divides
            500 evenly.
734      Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


21.4     The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386
         Architecture Family
21.4.1   The Intel 386 Architecture
         The Intel 386 architecture family includes the Intel 386 and its successors, the 486,
         Pentium, Pentium Pro, and so on, all of which implement essentially the same in­
         struction set5 but often in radically different ways (see, e.g., [Pent94]). The architec­
         ture is a thoroughly cisc design, but some of the implementations utilize Rise princi­
         ples, such as pipelining and superscalarity, to achieve significant speed improvements
         over previous family members. The architecture is significantly constrained by the
         requirement that it be upwardly compatible with such early Intel processors as the
         8086, which included only byte and halfword data and a rather difficult-to-use seg­
         mented addressing scheme. We discuss only a few of the compatibility features.
              There are eight 32-bit integer registers named eax, ebx, ecx, edx, ebp, esp, e s i,
         and edi. The low-order 16 bits of each register has a second name that is its name
         in the 8086 and that is used by the 8086 subset of the instruction set. The name of
         each 16-bit register is the name of the 32-bit register without the e. Each of the first
         four 16-bit registers is further subdivided into two byte registers, such as ah and a l
         that comprise the high- and low-order bytes of ax, respectively. In addition, there are
         six 32-bit segment registers that are used in computing addresses for loads, stores,
         branches, and calls. Some of the registers have dedicated purposes, such as ebp and
         esp, which point to the base and top of the current stack frame, respectively, while
         others have dedicated uses in certain classes of instructions, such as ecx, e s i, and
         ed i in string-manipulation instructions.
              A memory address is composed from a segment register (which is, in most cases,
         selected by the type of instruction), a base register, an optionally scaled (by 1, 2, 4,
         or 8) index register, and an eight- or 32-bit displacement, with each part optional
         (except that at least one must be present).
              Conditional control is accomplished by compare operations that set bits in a
         flags register and branches based on them.
              The architecture includes instructions for data movement (between registers and
         memory and between registers); binary and decimal arithmetic; logical, shift, and ro­
         tate operations; conditional and unconditional jumps; call and return; loop control;
         string manipulation; procedure entry and exit; floating point; byte translation; byte
         swap; and system control.
              The floating-point programming model includes a stack of eight 80-bit floating­
         point registers. The floating-point formats are 32-bit single, 64-bit double, and
         80-bit extended precision. All data are converted to extended precision upon being
         loaded into registers and may be converted back when stored. In addition to floating­
         point loads and stores, arithmetic and comparison operations, and conversions,



         5. The Pentium Pro actually has some new instructions, including integer and floating-point condi­
         tional moves and a floating-point compare that sets the integer condition codes.
              Section 21.4    The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386 Architecture Family   735




                                   Code generator




 FIG. 21.18 Intel reference compiler structure.


              there are instructions to load any of seven specific constants (such as tt) and to
              perform trigonometric, exponential, and logarithmic operations.
                   M ost Intel architecture instructions have two operands, although a significant
              number have one or zero. In the more typical two-operand case, the first operand is
              usually the first source and the second is both the second source and the destination,
              and operands are written in that order in the assembly language. The allowed types
              of the operands differ from one instruction to another, but in most cases one may be
              a memory address, register, or constant and the other may be a constant or register.
              See Appendix A.4 for further details of the assembly language.


21.4.2        The Intel Compilers
              Intel provides what it calls reference compilers for C, C ++, Fortran 77, and For­
              tran 90 for the 386 architecture family.
                   The structure of the compilers, which use the mixed model of optimizer orga­
              nization, is as shown in Figure 21.18. Each compiler consists of a language-specific
              front end (derived from work done at Multiflow and the Edison Design Group);
              the interprocedural, memory, and global optimizers; and a three-phase code gen­
              erator that does instruction selection, register allocation, and code scheduling. The
              interprocedural and memory optimizers were added to the compilers in 1991, along
              with a redesign of the code generator, called Proton, in an effort to increase the
736        Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


           scope of optimization for the Pentium processor and its successors. Since then, the
           global optimizer has been extensively reworked to base much of its action on partial-
           redundancy elimination.
               The front ends produce a medium-level intermediate code called IL-1 that in­
           cludes some notable features, such as array indexes that are regenerated from
           pointer-based array traversal, as may occur in C and C++. Figure 21.19 shows the
           IL-1 code for the main routine in Figure 21.2 (as produced by the Fortran front
           end) as an example. The operations are organized into basic blocks with lists of
           predecessors and successors. The meanings of some of the operations are as follows:

      1.   ENTRY in instruction 1 represents the entry point to the routine.
      2.   SSTORE in instructions 3, 9, 25, and 29 represents storing an integer to memory.
      3.   VOGEN in instruction 20 and ASTORE in instruction 21 represent generating an array
           subscript and storing into the indexed array location, respectively.
      4.   L00P_BEGIN in instructions 5 and 11 represents the beginning of a loop.
      5.   IF_REL. LE in lines 7 and 13 represents a loop closure test.

           The result operand comes first after the operator, followed by the source operands.
           Note that the SI32 qualifier marks operands as 32-bit integers and that the IF.REL
           operations include expected execution frequencies for the two branches.
                There is only one selectable level of global optimization (other than unopti­
           mized) and separate options control invocation of the interprocedural and memory
           optimizers.
                The interprocedural optimizer operates across file boundaries (by saving the
           IL-1 form of each routine) and may be driven by the results of execution profil­
           ing. It performs a series of analyses that are designed to collect information about
           how procedures are used and about some of their characteristics, such as their sizes,
           constant arguments, and uses of module-level static variables. The interprocedural
           optimizer then performs a series of optimizations that include inlining, procedure
           cloning, parameter substitution, and interprocedural constant propagation (see Sec­
           tion 19.3). Inlining is guided by whether a routine is called inside a loop, the size of
           the loop’s code body, and the presence of constant-valued arguments, and it is done
           as much for the benefit of the memory optimizer as to reduce call-return overhead.
           Cloning is done to create individual copies of routines that have distinct constant
           parameters, thus potentially making loop and array bounds known constants. Pa­
           rameter substitution tracks constant-valued arguments and propagates them to their
           uses as parameters. The interprocedural optimizer may also decide to pass arguments
           to particular routines in registers rather than on the run-time stack (except for unix ,
           for which the Application Binary Interface requires that they be passed in the stack).
                The output of the interprocedural optimizer is a lowered version of IL-1, called
           IL-2, along with IL -l’s program-structure information; this intermediate form is used
           for the remainder of the major components of the compiler, down through input to
           the code generator. The IL-2 form (after optimization) of the inner loop of the main
           program in Figure 21.2 is shown in Figure 21.20. The result operand comes first,
           after the operator, followed by the source operands. Note that most of the operations
             Section 21.4    The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386 Architecture Family   737


             Entry bblocks: O(MAIN)

             BBLOCK 0: (an entry bblock), preds: , succs: 1, stats:
                 I ENTRY.ARGS_REGS.ENT_GL0BAL
                 3 SST0RE.SI32 5 1(SI32) __l.MAIN.k
             BBLOCK 1: preds: 0 6, succs: 4 2, stats:
                 5 L00P.BEGIN 5 500
                 6 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 5 tO __l.MAIN.k
                 7 IF_REL.LE.SI32 5 99°/. 0°/, tO 500(SI32)
             BBLOCK 2: preds: 1, succs: 3, stats:
                 31 CALL.ARGS_REGS.CALLER_SAVES si
             BBLOCK 3: preds: 2, succs: , stats:
                 33 RET.Sr
             BBLOCK 4: preds: 1, succs: 5, stats:
                 9      SST0RE.SI32 6 1(SI32) __l.MAIN.l
             BBLOCK 5: preds: 4 7, succs: 7 6, stats:
                 II LOOP.BEGIN 6 500
                 12 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 6 tl __l.MAIN.l
                 13 IF_REL.LE.SI32 6 99°/, 0°/. tl 500(SI32)
             BBLOCK 6: preds: 5, succs: 1, stats:
                 27 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 5 tlO __l.MAIN.k
                 28 GADD.SI32 5 til 2 [tlO,1(SI32)]
                 29 SSTORE.SI32 5 til __l.MAIN.k
             BBLOCK 7: preds: 5, succs: 5, stats:
                 15 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 7 t2 __l.MAIN.k
                 16 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 7 t3 __l.MAIN.l
                 17 GADD.SI32 7 t4 2 [t2,t3]
                 18 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 7 t5 __l.MAIN.k
                 19 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 7 t6 __l.MAIN.l
                 20 V0GEN.2 7 t7 __l.MAIN.a 2
                 21 ASTORE.2.SI32 7 t4 __l.MAIN.a t7 2
                 23 SLOAD.ND.NREG.SI32 6 t8 __l.MAIN.l
                 24 GADD.SI32 6 t9 2 [t8,l(SI32)]
                 25 SSTORE.SI32 6 t9 __l.MAIN.l
FIG. 21.19 The IL-1 form of the main routine in Figure 21.2 as produced by the Fortran front end.


             BBLOCK 7: preds: 7 4, succs: 7 9, stats:
                 26 LOOP.BEGIN 6 500
                 30 ADD.SI32 7 t6 t4 t5
                 25 ASSIGN.N32 7 tl4 500(SI32)
                 29 IMUL.SI32 7 t7 tl4 t5
                 24 ADD.SI32 7 t8 t4 t7
                 23 SST.SI32 7 t6 t8 (addr( 1.MAIN.a)(P32) - 2004(SI32))(P32) __l.MAIN.a
                 21 ADD.SI32 6 t5 1(SI32) t5
                 2 IF.REL.GE.SI32 6 99°/, 0°/, 500(SI32) t5

FIG. 21.20 The IL-2 form of the inner loop in the main routine in Figure 21.2 as presented to the
           code generator.
738        Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


           have been lowered, subscripts have been expanded to address computations (note,
           particularly, line 23), and loop inversion and code motion have been performed.
                Intraprocedural control-flow analysis is done as the first stage of either mem­
           ory optimization or global optimization, whichever comes first according to the
           compilation options selected. It includes putting loops into a canonical form and
           representing their nesting structure.
                The memory optimizer is concerned with improving use of memory and caches,
           almost entirely by performing loop transformations. It first does SSA-based sparse
           conditional constant propagation (see Section 12.6) and then data-dependence ana­
           lysis using Banerjee’s tests [Bane8 8 ] for loops with known bounds. Before the de­
           pendence analysis, a phase known as “ loop cleanup” attempts to make loop nests
           perfectly nested and to make their bounds and strides known constants. The trans­
           formations that may be applied are loop interchange, loop distribution, strip mining,
           software prefetching, tiling, and creation of alternate loops. The last of these meth­
           ods deals with loops that would be susceptible to significant optimization if their
           bodies satisfied certain dependence (or independence) relations but for which the
           determination of that condition depends on information available only at run time.
           The loop tile sizes are selected using techniques developed by Lam, Rothberg, and
           Wolf ([LamR91] and [WolL91]). Iteration distances computed by the memory op­
           timizer are passed on to the code generator to control loop unrolling and code
           scheduling. Note that the inlining and procedure cloning that are done by the inter­
           procedural optimizer increase the effectiveness of memory optimization by making
           more loops susceptible to the dependence-testing algorithms.
                The global optimizer does a series of data-flow analyses and Banerjee’s array-
           dependence test for loops with known bounds, the latter to identify ordering con­
           straints on moves to and from memory. Control-flow analysis is done by determining
           dominators and back edges by the method of Lengauer and Tarjan (see Section 7.3).
           Data-flow analysis is done by a version of partial-redundancy elimination. Alias ana­
           lysis assumes that all pointer references may conflict with each other, except for
           reference parameters in Fortran, as prescribed by the language standard. The op­
           timizations performed by the global optimizer are, in order:

      1.   promotion of local and file-static variables to candidates for register allocation
      2.   constant propagation
      3.   dead-code elimination
      4.   local common-subexpression elimination
      5.   copy propagation
      6.   partial-redundancy elimination
      7.   a second pass of copy propagation
      8.   a second pass of dead-code elimination

               The code generator, called Proton, uses its own intermediate form called Proton
           IL (PIL). The PIL code that results directly from translating the IL-2 in Figure 21.20
              Section 21.4    The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386 Architecture Family   739
              esp based stack
              Stack frame size: 8

              BL0CK=3 Phys_pred=2 Phys_succ=4 Loop=2
                  CFlow_preds= B3 B2
                  CFlow_succs= B3 B4
              B3 opcode     opl      op2
              1   imerge    B2.1    8
              2   imerge    B1.3    B4.2
              3   add       2        1
              4   movi      $500
              5   imul      4        1
              6   add       2       5
              7   St        3        ..1.MAIN.LOCALSTATIC.a-2004(6,4)
              8   addi      1       $1
              9   movi      $500
              10 cjge       9       8      B3 p70°/0 m00
                                                       /.

FIG . 21.21   The PIL form of the inner loop in the main routine in Figure 2 1.2 immediately after
              translation to PIL from the IL-2 form in Figure 21.20.



              is shown in Figure 2 1 .2 1 . The operations are triples with the source operands
              specified after the operator and the triple number used to represent the result. Thus,
              for example, line 3 adds the results of lines 2 and 1, and line 7 stores the result of
              line 3 in the indicated memory location, which is indexed by the result of triple 6
              and has an offset given by the result of triple 4. The imerge operator is an SSA-form
              0 -function.
                   Proton performs instruction selection, register allocation, instruction schedul­
              ing, and a series of low-level optimizations, with the four tasks intermingled to a
              significant degree. Formation of cisc addresses is done first. This is a nontrivial op­
              eration because an address may consist of a base register, an index register, a scaling
              factor, and a displacement, and address evaluation can be executed in parallel with
              other operations on the more advanced implementations of the architecture. The
              optimization is done by peephole optimization applied along du-chains. Induction-
              variable optimizations are also done before code selection, so as to shape the code
              to the architecture.
                   Instruction selection is relatively straightforward, except for instruction combin­
              ing, which is driven by the small number of registers available and by the possibilities
              for running instructions in parallel in the Pentium and its successors. For example,
              a memory-to-memory add and a load-add-store sequence both take three cycles on
              Pentium, but the latter is more likely to be pairable with other instructions in the
              implementation’s dual pipelines. As another example, PIL represents sign extension
              of a byte as a load followed by a shift left 24 and a shift right 24, but use of the
              architecture’s load with sign extend instruction requires fewer cycles in some situa­
              tions. Similarly, generating an effective address that includes a base, an index, and
              a displacement can be done in a single instruction without a result register, as indi­
              cated above, but it can also be done by two register adds with the result going to a
740        Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


           register—which may be cheaper if the address is used more than once and if there is
           a register available to hold it.
                 Register allocation is done by a combination of local methods within basic
           blocks and by Chaitin-style graph coloring across basic blocks. The code generator
           divides the registers into local and global ones according to the loop structure of
           the given program. Programs with loops that have high (expected or measured)
           execution frequencies are allocated more registers for local use and registers are
           allocated from the innermost loops outward.
                The stack structure of the eight floating-point registers limits the effectiveness
           of register allocation, since merging paths are required to have their stacks match.
           However, on the Pentium and Pentium Pro, the f xch (floating-point exchange regis­
           ter contents) instruction can be executed with zero result latency in the V pipeline, so
           the floating-point stack can be treated as a register set, at least within a basic block.
           This is in contrast to the 486 processor, in which f xch requires four cycles, so that
           treating the floating-point stack as a set of equivalent registers is highly unprofitable.
                 Global allocation of the integer registers might seem highly dubious, since there
           are only eight 32-bit registers and several of them have dedicated uses. However,
           four of the 32-bit registers have as their low-order 16 bits pairs of byte registers,
           thus increasing the number of registers available; also, only the stack-pointer register
           is permanently dedicated and unavailable for other uses. Moreover, while eight
           registers are certainly less useful than 32, studies of global register allocation have
           shown that eight are also much better than one or two.
                Instruction scheduling is done by list scheduling and includes local register allo­
           cation, much in the style of the method developed by Goodman and Hsu [G0 0 H 8 8 ].
           It is mostly done a block at a time, although predecessor and successor blocks are
           taken into account to a limited degree. Scheduling is strongly table-driven, since the
           architecture’s implementations differ significantly in their pipeline organization and
           instruction timing. For example, the 386 is not pipelined at all, while Pentium has
           dual pipelines and the Pentium Pro has decoupled pipelines with a significant capac­
           ity for out-of-order execution.
                The low-level optimizations performed in the code generator include the fol­
           lowing:
      1.   induction-variable optimizations, as mentioned above, to optimize usage of address­
           ing modes and registers; strength reduction; and linear-function test replacement,
           including replacing multiplications by sequences of shifts and adds
      2.   machine idioms, searched for along du-chains, such as using the increment and
           decrement instructions in place of addition and subtraction by one
      3.   alignment of loops on cache-block boundaries
      4.   converting of so-called prefix instructions that operate on halfword operands to
           the corresponding byte or word forms, which are faster on Pentium and newer
           implementations
      5.   code reselection to replace register-to-register instruction sequences with memory-
           based operations where register pressure makes it desirable or necessary to do so
      6.   software pipelining along the lines of window scheduling (see Section 17.4.1)
                Section 21.4     The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386 Architecture Family   741


                main: .Bl.l:
                        pushl        %ebp
                        movl         °/0esp,°/0ebp
                        subl          $3,°/0esp
                        andl          $-8,°/0esp
                        addl         $4,#  /«esp
                        pushl        °/0edi
                        pushl        °/0esi
                        pushl        °/0ebx
                        subl         $8,#  /«esp
                        movl         length, °/0esi
                        xorl         °/«ebx,°/0ebx
                        imull        width, °/0esi
                        movl         #/0esi,°/0edi
                        xorl         #/0ecx,°/0ecx
                        movl         $-10,°/0edx
                        xorl         °/0eax,°/0eax
                        addl         #/0esi,# /0ecx
                        addl         °/«eax,°/0ebx
                        addl         °/0edi,°/0eax
                        incl         #/0edx
                        jne           .B1.2
                        movl         °/0ecx, (°/0esp)
                        movl         #
                                     /0ebx,4(#   /«esp)
                        call         process
                        xorl         °/0eax,°/0eax
                        popl         °/0edx
                        popl         °/0ecx
                        popl         °/0ebx
                        popl         °/0esi
                        popl         #
                                     /«edi
                        movl         °/0ebp,°/0esp
                        popl         #
                                     /.ebp
                        ret

FIG. 2 1 .2 2   Pentium assembly code for the C program in Figure 21.1 as produced by the Intel
                reference compiler.


          7.    reassociation to collect loop-invariant operations and to move them out of the
                containing loop
          8.    loop unrolling
          9.    straightening and basic-block reordering to permit usage of short branch instructions

                     The code generator includes an option to produce position-independent code for
                Unix systems, and common-subexpression elimination applies to G O T references
                (see Section 5.7) as it does to other expressions.
                     The Pentium assembly code for the example C program in Figure 21.1 is shown
                in Figure 21.22. Note that the constant value of kind has been propagated into the
                conditional and the dead code eliminated, the loop invariant le n g th * width has
742            C ase S tu d ies o f C o m p ile rs an d Future T re n d s


               si: .B1 .1:

               .B1.7:     movl          -2004 (#  /«ecx) ,°/0edx
                          movl          -2004(°/0eax) ,°/0ebx
                          addl          °/«ebx,#/«edx
                          movl          °/,edx,-2004(#   /,eax)
                          movl          -2000(#   /«ecx) ,°/0edx
                          movl          -2000 (#  /«eax) ,#/«ebx
                          addl          °/0ebx,°/0edx
                          movl          #/,edx,-2000 (#  /«eax)
                          movl          -1996(#   /«ecx) ,#/«edx
                          movl          -1996(#   /«eax) ,#/,ebx
                          addl          #/,ebx,#/«edx
                          movl          #
                                        /,edx,-1996 (#   /0eax)
                          movl          -1992(#   /«ecx) ,#/,edx
                          movl          -1992(#   /«eax) ,#/«ebx
                          addl          $16,°/«ecx
                          addl          #
                                        /*ebx,# /«edx
                          movl          #
                                        /,edx,-1992(°/,eax)
                          movl           16(°/0esp) ,°/0edx
                          addl          $16,#  /«eax
                          cmpl          #/,edx,°/0eax
                       jle               .B1.7
               .B1.17: cmpl             #/,ebp,#/,eax
                          jg             .B1.8
                do   00   movl          -2004(°/0ecx) ,#   /0edx
                          movl          -2004(°/ceax) ,#   /«ebx
                          addl          °/0ebx,°/0edx
                          addl          $4,°/0ecx
                          movl          #/*edx,-2004 (°/,eax)
                          addl          $4, °/0eax
                          cmpl          °/0ebp,°/0eax
                          jle            .B1.18
               .B1.8:     movl          8(°/0esp) ,°/0ebx


 FIG . 21.23   Pentium assembly code for the routine s l ( ) in the Fortran 77 program in Figure 21.2
               as produced by the Intel reference compiler.



               been rem oved from the loop , the m ultiplication by h e ig h t has been strength-reduced
               to addition s, the local variables have been allocated to registers, and instruction
               scheduling has been perform ed. On the other hand, the loop has not been unrolled,
               the tail call to p r o c e s s ( ) has not been optim ized, and the accum ulation o f a r e a
               could have been turned into a single m ultiplication.
                    The Pentium assem bly code show n in Figures 2 1 .2 3 and 2 1 .2 4 is produced by
               the Fortran 7 7 compiler, with interprocedural, memory, and global optim ization all
               enabled, for our exam ple p rogram in Figure 2 1 .2 , except that we have elided the
               initialization loop s in the m ain program and all o f s i ( ) except the innerm ost loop.
Section 21.4    The Intel Reference Compilers for the Intel 386 Architecture Family   743


MAIN: .B2.1:
        pushl       °/«esi
        pushl       °/.ebp
        pushl       °/0ebx
        movl        $2000 ,°/0ebx
         movl       $l,# /0ebp

.B2.5:   movl       $1 ,#/0esi
         movl       $500, °/0ebp
.B2.6:   leal       l(# /,esi) ,#/,eax
         cmpl       $500, °/0eax
         jg          .B2.12
.B2.7:  movl        °/0eax,°/0edx
        shll        $2, #/«edx
        subl        °/,eax,°/0edx
        leal         (#/*eax,°/0edx,8), °/0eax
        leal         (#/,eax,°/0eax,4), #
                                        /,ebx
        shll        $4, °/0ebx
.B2.8: movl         $-500,°/0eax
        movl        °/0ebp,°/0ecx
        shll        $2,# /0ecx
.B2.9: movl          ..1. MAIN.LOCLSTATC.a .1.0 (#
                                                 /,ecx,°/,eax,4) ,°/,edx
        addl        #
                    /,edx,..1.MAIN.LOCLSTATC.a .1.0 (°/,ebx,°/,eax,4)
        incl        °/0eax
        jne          .B2.9
.B2.10: addl        $2000, °/0ebx
        cmpl        $1000000, °/,ebx
        j1©          .B2.8
.B2.12: incl        #/,esi
        addl        $500,#  /,ebp
        cmpl        $500,#  /,esi
        jle          .B2.6
.B2.13: popl        °/0ebx
         popl       #/.ebp
         popl       #/,esi
         ret

Pentium assembly code for the main routine in the Fortran 77 program
as produced by the Intel reference compiler.


Since s i ( ) has been inlined, the compiler can make use of the information that the
value of n is 500, which it does in using constant values in the loop control. The
innermost loop (beginning at label .B2.9) has not been unrolled, but linear-function
test replacement has been performed on it. The local variables have been allocated
to registers, but otherwise the code in the innermost loop is entirely cisc-style.
     However, the compiler produces code for both s l ( ) and the main routine,
although this is unnecessary—the main routine manifestly calls only s l ( ), which
in turn, calls no other routines. And, there are some interesting differences between
the code produced for s l ( ) and for the main program for the same loop nest.
744            C ase Studies o f C om pilers and Future Trends


               While the code has not been unrolled and is cisc-style in the main routine, in the
               subroutine it has been unrolled by a factor o f four (beginning at label .B 1 .7 ) and
               is thoroughly Rise-style code. Interprocedural constant propagation has not been
               done, as can be seen by noting, for exam ple, that there is a rolled version o f the loop
               (beginning at label .B 1 .18) in addition to the unrolled one. According to [Sava95],
               this is the case because the inlining w as done and no clones o f s l ( ) were created.
               Also, the compiler chooses between c isc - and Rise-style code generation according
               to the opportunities for pairing instructions in Pentium’s dual pipelines. If the r isc -
               like intermediate code includes nontrivial opportunities for pairing, Rise-style code
               is generated; if it does not, cisc-style code is produced. Unrolling the innermost loop
               in the subroutine created opportunities for pairing, so Rise-style code w as produced
               for it.




21.5           W rap-U p
               In Table 21.1 we summarize the performance of each of the four compiler suites on
               the first (C) example program, and in Table 21.2 we summarize their performance
               on the second (Fortran) program.




TABLE 2 1 .1   Comparison of the four compiler suites on the C example program.

                                                                                   Intel 386
                                         Sun SPARC     IBM XL       DEC GEM        family

               constant propagation
               of kind                   yes           yes          yes            yes
               dead-code elimination     almost all    yes          yes            yes
               loop-invariant
               code motion               yes           yes          yes            yes
               strength reduction
               of height                 yes           yes          no             yes
               reduction of area
               computation               no            no           no             no
               loop unrolling factor     4             2            5              none
               rolled loop               yes           yes          no             yes
               register allocation       yes           yes          yes            yes
               instruction scheduling    yes           yes          yes            yes
               stack frame eliminated    yes           no           no             no
               tail call optimized       yes           no           no             no
             Section 21.6    Future Trends in Compiler Design and Implementation              745

TABLE 21.2   C om parison o f the four compiler suites on the Fortran exam ple program .

                                                                                  Intel 386
                                        Sun SPARC     IBM XL       DEC GEM        family
             address of a (i) a
             common subexpression       yes           yes          yes            yes
             procedure integration
             o f s l( )                 yes           no           no             yes
             loop unrolling factor      4             2            4              none
             rolled loop                yes           yes          yes            yes
             instructions in
             innermost loop             21            9            21             4
             linear-function test
             replacement                no            no           no             yes
             software pipelining        yes           no           no             no
             register allocation        yes           yes          yes            yes
             instruction scheduling     yes           yes          yes            yes
             elimination of s l ( )
             subroutine                 no            no           no             no



21.6         Future Trends in Compiler Design
             and Implementation
             There are several clear main trends developing for the near future of advanced
             compiler design and implementation:
        1.   SSA form is being used for more and more optimizations, primarily because it
             allows methods that were originally designed to apply to basic blocks or extended
             basic blocks to be applied to whole procedures, and because it generally results in
             significant additional improvements in performance.
        2.   Partial-redundancy elimination is being used more frequently, in part because the
             modern versions of it are very effective and much more efficient than the original
             form, and in part because its data-flow analyses provide a basis for organizing one’s
             thinking about and performing other optimizations.
        3.   Techniques such as SSA form and partial-redundancy elimination are being com­
             bined to produce versions of optimizations that improve their applicability, effec­
             tiveness, and/or speed.
        4.   Scalar-oriented optimizations, including most of the ones we cover, are being inte­
             grated more closely with parallelization and vectorization in production compiler
             systems.
        5.   Data-dependence testing, data-cache optimization, and software pipelining will all
             advance significantly in the next decade.
746         Case Studies of Compilers and Future Trends


       6.   The most active research area in scalar compilation is and will continue to be
            optimization.
                Examples of all these trends can be seen in the papers presented at the annual
            conferences on programming language implementation.

21.7        Further Reading
            The official descriptions of the processor architectures discussed in this chapter are
            as follows:
                Architecture         Reference
                sparc Version 8     [SPAR92]
                sparc Version 9     [WeaG94]
                power                [POWE90]
                PowerPC             [Powe93]
                Alpha               [Alph92]
                Intel 386 family    [Pent94]
            and the published descriptions of the compiler suites are as follows:
                Compilers                                References
                Sun sparc compilers                      [Much8 8 ]
                Digital’s GEM compilers                  [BliC92]
                Intel 386 family reference compilers     [Inte93]
            There is, unfortunately, no in-depth published description of the IBM XL compilers,
            although [BerC92], [GolR90], [OBrH90], and [Warr90] describe aspects of them.
            The IBM XL compilers and their intermediate languages, XIL and YIL, are dis­
            cussed in [0B r095]. [BerG89] concentrates on the register allocator, and [Warr90],
            [GolR90], and [BerC92] concentrate on the instruction scheduler.
                 AT&T’s specification of C++ is [E11S90]. A bare-bones description of IBM’s PL.8
            language is found in [AusH82].
                The IBM 801 R i s e system is described in [Radi82] and [Hopk87].
                Banerjee’s array-dependence test for loops with known bounds is described
            in [Bane8 8 ]. The Banerjee-Wolfe test is found in [Wolf89b].
                The description of the Sun compiling and operating systems’ support for dy­
            namic linking is found in Gingell et al. [GinL87].
                Data-flow analysis in the GEM compilers is done using the symbolic evaluation
            method of Reif and Lewis as described in [ReiL77] and [ReiL 8 6 ]. The GEM code
            generator was designed from the ideas in the PDP-11 bliss compiler [WulJ75].
                The unix System V Release 4 ABI supplement for the Intel 386 family is
            [UNIX93]. The Intel compilers select loop tile sizes using techniques developed by
            Lam, Rothberg, and Wolf (see [LamR91] and [WolL91]). Goodman and Hsu’s tech­
            nique for combining instruction scheduling and local register allocation is described
            in [G0 0 H 8 8 ].
                                                                            APPENDIX A




                                    Guide to Assembly
                                      Languages Used
                                          in This Book



       I
           n this appendix, we present succinct descriptions of the assembly language for
           each of the architectures we have used in examples. These descriptions are not
           assembly-language manuals—they provide only enough information to read our
           examples.


A. 1    Sun SPARC Versions 8 and 9 Assembly
       Language
       In sparc assembly language, an instruction consists of an optional label field ending
       with a colon, an opcode, a series of operands separated by commas, and an optional
       comment field beginning with an exclamation point. The target operand is the last
       one. The address in a load or store is written as a bracket-enclosed sum of a register
       and either a register or a displacement. Register operands may be of the forms shown
       in Table A .l. Register rO (equals gO) is special: it produces a zero when it is used as an
       operand and discards results written to it. The operators °/0hi ( ) and 70lo ( ) extract
       the high-order 2 2 bits and low-order 1 0 bits, respectively, of their operand.
           The opcodes used in the examples are listed in Table A.2. Some of the opcodes
       are extensions of the machine instruction set—for example, Id may produce either
       an integer or a floating-point load instruction, depending on the type of its target
       operand. The , a completer (whose value may be “ , a ” or absent) nullifies the branch
       delay slot. Branches with “ i , ” or “ x , ” at the beginning of the operand list branch
       based on the 32-bit and 64-bit condition codes, respectively.
            sparc pseudo-operations begin with a period. The ones used in the examples
       appear in Table A.3.
           While sparc-V9 extends Version 8 in many upward-compatible ways, such situ­
       ations are, in most cases, not pertinent to our examples.

                                                                                             747
748          G uide to A ssem b ly L an g u ag e s U sed in T h is B ook


 TABLE A.1   sparc register operand forms.

             Name            Meaning

             %Ti             Integer register   0 < i < 31
             Xgi             Global integer register /, 0 < / < 7
             Hi              In integer register /, 0 < i < 7
             Hi              Local integer register /, 0 < / < 7
             lot             Out integer register /, 0 < / < 7
             Ui              Floating-point register /, 0 < / < 31
             y.sp            Stack pointer (#/,o6)
             •/.fp           Frame pointer (#/,i6)



TABLE A*2    sparc opcodes used in the text.

             Name                 Operation

             add                  Add
             ba, a                Branch always
             b g,a                Branch on greater
             bge, a               Branch on greater than or equal
             b l ,a               Branch on less
             b le, a              Branch on less than or equal
             bne, a               Branch on not equal
             c a ll               Call
             cmp                  Compare
             faddd                Floating-point add double
             f adds               Floating-point add single
             fd iv s              Floating-point divide single
             fd to i              Convert double to integer
             f ito d              Convert integer to double
             fmuld                Floating-point multiply double
             f subs               Floating-point subtract single
             ip re fe tc h        Instruction prefetch (sparc -V9 only)
             Id                   Load word
             ldd                  Load doubleword
             ld f                 Load word floating-point
             ldh                  Load halfword
             mov                  Move
             move                 Conditional move on equals
             nop                  No operation
             or                   Or
            Section A.2              IBM POWER and PowerPC Assembly Language                    749


TABLE A.2   (continued)

            Name               Operation

            re sto re          Restore register window
            re t               Return
            save               Save register window
            se th i            Set high-order 22 bits
            sll                Shift left logical
            smul               Signed multiply
            St                 Store word
            std                Store doubleword
            stf                Store word floating-point
            sub                Subtract
            subcc              Subtract and set condition codes
            umul               Unsigned multiply
            unimp              Unimplemented




TABLE A.3   spa rc   p s e u d o - o p e r a t io n s .


            Name                   Meaning

            .a lig n               Set alignment (in bytes)
            .d ata                 Switch to data segment
            .double                Doubleword constant
            .end                   End of inlining template
            .glo b al              Global symbol
            .se g                  Switch segments
            .tem plate             Beginning of inlining template
            .te x t                Switch to text segment
            .word                  Word constant




A.2         IBM POWER and PowerPC Assembly Language
            In p o w e r and PowerPC assembly language, an instruction consists o f an optional
            label field terminated by a colon, an opcode, a series o f operands separated by
            com m as, and an optional comment field beginning with a pound sign. The target
            operand is the first one. The address in a load or store is written as either a displace­
            ment followed by a base register in parentheses, or an index register followed by a
            base register separated by a com m a. A general register operand is a number in the
            range 0 through 31 or the letter r followed by such a number, with the type o f each
750            G uide to A ssem b ly L a n g u a g e s U sed in T h is B ook


 TA BLE A .4   pow er    and PowerPC opcodes used in the text.

               POWER        PowerPC
               Name         Name            Operation

               a            addc            Add
               ai           addic           Add immediate
               b            b               Unconditional branch
               bbt          bbt             Branch on condition register bit true
               be           be              Branch conditional
               ber          ber             Branch conditional register
               bl           bl              Branch and link
               cal          addi            Compute address lower
               emp          emp             Compare
               empi         empi            Compare immediate
               cror         cror            Condition register or
               doz          —
                                            Difference or zero
               fa           fadd            Floating add
               1            lwz             Load
               lbz          lb z            Load byte and zero
               lhau         lhau            Load half algebraic with update
               lu           lwzu            Load with update
               mf sp r      mf sp r         Move from special register
               mtspr        mtspr           Move to special register
               muls         mullw           Multiply short
               rlinm        rlwinm          Rotate left immediate and mask
               St           stw             Store
               stu          stwu            Store with update



               register distinguished by the opcode. R egister rO is special: in address com putations,
               it produces a zero when used as an operan d in address com putation. An operand of
               the form CRw, with 0 < n < 7, represents a condition register; CRO m ay be set by any
               integer instruction w hose opcode ends in a dot. C om pare instructions m ay set any
               condition register and branch instructions m ay test any o f them.
                    R egisters SP and RTOC are the stack pointer and the pointer to the global object
               table, respectively.
                    The opcodes used in the exam ples are listed in Table A .4. The difference or zero
               instruction ( d o z ) in p o w e r has been elim inated in PowerPC.



A.3            DEC Alpha Assembly Language
               In A lpha assem bly language, an instruction consists o f an optional label field ending
               with a colon, an opcode, a series o f operan ds separated by com m as, and an optional
            Section A.3        DEC Alpha Assembly Language                                 751

            comment field beginning with a semicolon. The target operand is the last one. The
            address in a load or store is written as a displacement followed by a base register
            in parentheses. Integer register operands may be of the forms shown in Table A.5.
            Register r31 is special: it produces a zero when used as an operand and discards
            results written to it.
                The opcodes used in the examples are listed in Table A.6. Some of the opcodes
            are extensions of the machine instruction set—for example, c l r and mov both do
            logical ors.
                Recall that DEC’S “ longword” and “ quadword” are our “ word” and “ double-
            word,” respectively.

TABLE A.5 Alpha integer register names.

            N am e      M eaning

            r   i       Integer register /, 0 < / < 31
             sp         Stack pointer (r30)
            gP          G lobal pointer (r29)


TABLE A.6 Alpha opcodes used in the text.

            N am e      O peration

             addl       Add longw ord
             addq       Add q uadw ord
            be q        Branch if register equal to zero
            b is        L ogical or
            b le        Branch if register less than or equal to zero
            b it        Branch if register less than zero
            bne         Branch if register not equal to zero
             c lr       C lear register
             cmple      C om pare signed longw ord less than or equal
             cm plt     C om pare signed longw ord less than
             cv ttq     Convert ieee floating point to integer
             in sb l    Insert byte low
             js r       Ju m p to subroutine
             Id a       L o ad address
             ld a h     L o ad address high
             ld l       L o ad longw ord
             ld q       L o ad q uadw ord
             ld q _ u   L o ad unaligned q u adw ord
            mov         M ove register
             m skbl     M ask byte low
             m u ll     M ultiply longw ord
             nop        N o operation                                              (continued)
752          Guide to Assem bly L anguages Used in This Book


 TABLE A*6   (continued)

             Name          Operation

             ret           Return from subroutine
             s4subq        Scale quadword by 4 and subtract
             sll           Shift left logical
             stl           Store longword
             stq           Store quadword
             stq_u         Store unaligned quadword
             subq          Subtract quadword



A.4          Intel 386 Architecture Assembly Language
             In the Intel assembly language for the 386 architecture family, an instruction consists
             of an optional label field terminated by a colon, an opcode, a series of operands
             separated by commas, and an optional comment field beginning with a semicolon.
             Instructions may have zero to two operands, depending on the opcode and usage
             (e.g., the return instruction r e t may have one operand, but it is optional). For two-
             operand instructions, the second operand is usually both the second source and the
             destination.
                   A memory address is written as a displacement followed by a comma-separated
             list in parentheses; the list consists of a base register followed by an index register
             followed by a scaling factor (which applies to the index register), each of which
             is optional, except that if no index register appears there can be no scaling factor.
             An integer register operand is a percent sign followed by the name of the register.
             Constants begin with a dollar sign.
                   The integer register names are given in Table A .7. Some of the 32-bit registers
             have 16-bit subregisters and some have eight-bit subregisters also, to provide com-


TABLE A.7    Intel 386 architecture integer register names.

             32-Bit    16-Bit       8-Bit
             Name      Name         Names      Usage

             eax       ax           a l, ah    General register
             ebx       bx           bl, bh     General register
             ecx       cx           cl, ch     General register
             edx       dx           dl, dh     General register
             ebp       bp                      Base (or frame) pointer
             e si      si                      General register
             edi       di                      General register
             esp       sp                      Stack pointer
             Section A.5      Hewlett-Packard’s PA-RISC Assembly Language                                 753

TABLE A.8 Intel 386 architecture opcodes used
          in the text.

             Name       Operation

             addl       Add
             andl       Logical and
             c a ll     Call
             cmpl       Compare
             fadd       Floating-point add
             imull      Multiply
             in cl      Increment
             jg         Jump on greater than
             jle        Jump on less than or equal
             jne        Jump on not equal
             le a l     Load effective address
             movl       Move
             popl       Pop
             pushl      Push
             ret        Return
             sh ll      Shift left logical
             subl       Subtract
             xorl       Logical exclusive or


             patibility with earlier Intel processors. While six of the registers are general purpose,
             in some cases some of them are used in dedicated ways by specific instructions, such
             as ecx, e s i , and e d i for string-manipulation instructions.
                     The floating-point registers are 80 bits long and form a stack. They are named
             /#0s t ( 0 ) (or just °/0s t ) through °/0s t ( 7 ) . Typical instructions, such as floating-point
             adds, may appear as follows:
                 fadd        °/0st (2) ,°/0st
                 fadd         1.0
             The first of these instructions adds the contents of %st and °/0s t (2) and replaces the
             value of °/0s t with the result, and the second adds 1.0 to °/0s t .
                  The opcodes used in examples in the text are listed in Table A.8. The suffix
             “ 1” on all the integer instructions indicates that they operate on long (i.e., 32-bit)
             operands.


A. 5         Hewlett-Packard’s PA-RISC Assembly Language
             In p a - r i s c assembly language, an instruction consists of an optional label field, an
             opcode, a series of operands separated by commas, and an optional comment field.
754            G u ide to A ssem b ly L an g u ag e s U sed in T h is B ook


               The target operand is the last one. The address in a load or store is written as a
               displacem ent or index register follow ed by a base register in parentheses. Register
               operan ds m ay be o f the form s shown in Table A .9. The operators LR' and RR'
               extract the high-order and low -order 16 bits, respectively, o f their constant operand.
                    The opcodes used in the exam ples are listed in Table A. 10. Som e o f the op ­
               codes are extensions o f the m achine instruction set— for exam ple, COPY is actually
               a subcase o f OR, and COMB is shorthand for COMBF and COMBT (com pare and branch
               on false and true, respectively). The com pleter m od indicates a modification o f the
               base register in a load or store instruction; in particular, MA m odifies the base reg­
               ister by addin g the displacem ent to it after form ing the effective memory address.
               The com pleter cond indicates an arithm etic (or other) condition (for exam ple, SDC
               indicates “ som e digit carry ” ) and the com pleter n (whose value m ay be N) indicates
               nullification o f the instruction follow ing a branch.




 TA BLE A .9   pa - r is c   re g is te r n a m e s .


               Name             Meaning

               °/0rz           Integer register /, 0 < i < 31
               /#0frz          Floating-point register /, 0 < i < 31
               /#ofrzL         Floating-point register /, 0 < / < 31, left half
               °/ofr/R         Floating-point register /, 0 < / < 31, right half



TA BLE A. 10   pa-risc opcodes.

               Name                            Operation

               ADD                             Add
               ADDB                            Add and branch
               ADDBT                           Add and branch on true
               ADDI                            Add immediate
               ADDIB, cond                     Add immediate and branch on condition
               ADDIL                           Add immediate left
               B                               Branch
               BL                              Branch and link
               BV                              Branch vectored
               COMB,cond, n                    Compare and branch
               COMBF, cond                     Compare and branch on false
               COMCLR                          Compare and clear
               COMIBF,cond, n                  Compare immediate and branch on false
               COPY                            Copy
               DCOR                            Decimal correct
                Section A .5   H ew lett-Packard’s PA-RISC Assem bly Language   755


TA B LE A. 10   (continued)

                Name           Operation

                FLDWS, mod     Floating-point load word short
                FSTWS, mod     Floating-point store word short
                LDHS, mod      Load halfword short
                LDI            Load immediate
                LDO            Load offset
                LDWM, mod      Load word and modify
                LDWS, mod      Load word short
                LDWX, mod      Load word indexed
                MOVE           Move register
                NOP            No operation
                OR             Logical or
                SHIADD         Shift one and add
                SH2ADD         Shift two and add
                SH3ADD         Shift three and add
                SHD            Shift double
                STW            Store word
                STWM, mod      Store word and modify
                SUB            Subtract
                XMPYU          Fixed-point multiply unsigned
                                                                   APPENDIX B




                 Representation of Sets,
                Sequences, Trees, DAGs,
                         and Functions



T
         he choice of an appropriate concrete representation of an abstract data
         structure can make the difference between an algorithm’s running in linear
         or quadratic time versus its requiring large polynomial or even exponential
         time. Thus, it is essential that we understand the possible choices for representing
data structures, the time required by various operations performed on them, and the
space they occupy if we are to turn algorithms presented here or elsewhere into code
that runs efficiently.
     Our goal in this appendix is not to provide a course in data structures, but
primarily to remind the reader of useful concrete representations of data structures
that should be considered in implementing algorithms such as those in this book.
    For example, suppose we need to represent strictly increasing sequences of
integers in the range 0 through u — 1 with at most s members in the sequences. Then,
for u = 64,

    1 ,3 ,5 ,1 1 ,2 3 ,4 3 ,5 3 ,6 2

is such a sequence, and

    3 ,1 ,1 5

is not, since in this second case, the first member of the sequence is larger than the
second. We might represent such sequences, for example, by two-way linked lists
in which the list entries contain the integers or by doubleword bit vectors in which
bit position i is 1 if and only if i is in the sequence, as shown in Figure B .l(a) and
(b), respectively. Let s be the number of elements that are currently in the sequence.
Suppose that the operations we need to be able to perform on such sequences are (1)
adding a value, (2) removing a value, (3) testing membership of a value, (4) merging
sequences, and (5) determining the length of a sequence.
     For the linked-list implementation, we perform each of the operations as
follows:

                                                                                  757
758              R epresen tation o f Sets, Sequences, T rees, D A G s, and Functions


                 Head




                 (a)


                               0x00000000 0x00004044

                 (b)
      FIG. B.l Representation of the three-member, strictly increasing sequence 3, 7, 15 by (a) a two-
                 way linked list, and (b) by a doubleword bit vector (the bits are numbered from the
                 right).


            1.   adding a value v : Traverse the list, com paring members to v until we (a) find vy (b)
                 find a value larger than i/, or (c), come to the end o f the list. For cases (b) and (c),
                 we insert v at the appropriate place, and for (a), we do nothing more.

            2 . removing a value v: Traverse the list, com paring members to v until we (a) find i/, (b)
                 find a value larger than v, or (c) come to the end o f the list. For case (a), we remove
                 the entry containing i/, and for (b) and (c), we do nothing more.

            3.   testing membership o f v: Traverse the list, com paring members to v until we (a) find
                 i/, (b) find a value larger than i/, or (c) come to the end o f the list. For case (a), we
                 answer “ yes,” and for (b) and (c), we answer “ n o .”
            4.   merging sequences: Traverse both lists in parallel, selecting elements from each list
                 according to their relative magnitudes and combining them into one list, eliminating
                 duplicates in the process.
            5.   determining the length o f a sequence: Traverse the list, counting the members.

                 Each o f these operations takes 0 { u ) time in the worst case and O (s) time in the
                 typical case, and the sequences require 3s w ords o f storage.
                     For the bit-vector implementation, we first construct an array of u = 64 double-
                 w ords mask [1 • • 6 4 ], each o f which has one bit set to 1, namely, the /th bit in the ith
                 doublew ord. Call the current value o f the sequence seq.
                     We perform the operations as follows:

            1. adding a value v: Logically or together se q and mask [i/].
            2. removing a value v: Bitwise complement mask \_v~\ and logically and the result with
                 seq .

            3.   testing membership o f v: Logically and together se q and mask O ] . If the result is
                 nonzero, answer “ yes,” otherwise answer “ n o.”

            4.   merging sequences: Logically o r the two sequences.
     Section B.l     Representation of Sets                                                 759

5.   determining the length of a sequence: For v = 1 to w, logically and together se q and
     mask |> ] , counting the number of times that the result is nonzero.

     Now each operation other than (5) requires constant time, while determining length
     requires 0 (u ) time, and the bit vectors occupy two words each.
          Thus, given the above set of operations to be performed, we would prefer the bit-
     vector representation, unless determining the length of the sequence is an operation
     that occurs very frequently. Note also that determining the length of the sequence
     can be sped up significantly for either representation by amortizing its cost over
     the other operations; i.e., we could keep a count of the length of the sequence and
     modify it each time an operation adds or removes an element. For the bit-vector
     representation, this still requires counting when we combine two sequences.
          On the other hand, suppose that the range of integers allowed in the sequences
     is on the order of u = 1,000,000 but that the sequences that occur never have more
     than s = 50 elements. Now the trade-offs steer us toward the linked-list implemen­
     tation: Each of the linked-list operations costs us at most 50 operations and the lists
     occupy at most 150 words each, while the bit-vector operations each take time that
     is O ( m), but the vectors occupy [1,000,000/32] = 31,250 words each.
          Note that both implementations can be dynamically allocated and reallocated to
     deal with changes in size of the data structure, as long as they are accessed through
     pointers.



     Representation of Sets
     As is the case for most data structures, how we choose to represent sets depends
     on the nature of the elements, the cardinality of the universe from which the sets’
     elements are drawn, the typical and maximal sizes of the sets, and the operations to
     be performed on them.
            If the universe U is a range of u integers, and preferably 0 , . . . , « — 1 for some
     m, then several sorts of representations become simpler than they otherwise might
     be. If it is not of this form, it is often useful to map the elements of U onto the range
     0 , . . . , u — 1 by hashing.
            Whether the hash function needs to be easily invertible depends on the oper­
     ations to be performed on the set, e.g., if we are to union two sets and then to
     enumerate the members of the union, an invertible hash function is virtually nec­
     essary. If no operation requires us to enumerate the members of a set, invertibility is
     unnecessary.
            The fundamental operations on sets are union (“ U” ), intersection (“ fl” ), differ­
     ence             equality (“= ”), subset (“c ”), and membership (“€”). Some situations
     may require set product (“ x ” ) and other operations as well.
            Bit vectors are a set representation that maximizes the ease of performing the
     fundamental operations, especially if U = { 0 , . . . , u — 1} for some relatively small
     u. They are used in most data-flow analyses (see Chapter 8) because the relevant
     operations are fast and the representation is relatively compact. For a U with u
760              Representation of Sets, Sequences, Trees, D AGs, and Functions


                     procedure Set_Union(A,B) returns set of U
                         A, B: set of U
                     begin
                         S := A: se t of U
                         x, y: U
                         for x := f i r s t ( B ) to la st(B ) do
                            for y := f ir s t (A ) to last(A ) do
                                 i f x = y then
                                     goto LI
                                 fi
                                 y := next(A)
                                 x := next(B)
                            od
                            S := append(S,x)
                 LI:     od
                         return S
                     end      I I Set_Union
      FIG. B.2   ic a n   c o d e t o c o m p u t e s e t u n io n f o r t h e lin k e d - lis t r e p r e s e n t a t io n .



                 elements, they require \u/32] words per set and the fundamental operations are
                 performed as follows:

                          Set Operation                 Bit-Vector Operation

                          c := a U b                    bv(c) : = bv(a) or bv(b)
                          c := aC\ b                    bv(c) : = bv(a) and bv(b)
                          c := a — b                    bv(c) : = bv(a) and ! bv(b)
                          t := a = b                    t := (bv(a) xor bv(b)) * 0
                          t := a c b                    t : = (! bv(a) and bv(b)) * 6
                          t := a e b                    t := (mask[<z] and bv{b)) *

                 where bv{x) is the bit-vector representation of x; 0 is the bit vector of all zeros; or,
                 and, xor, and “ ! ” (not) are the bitwise logical operators; and mask [ ] is a mask such
                 that bit i o f mask [/] is a one and all other bits are zero. Thus, the typical operations
                 can all be performed in time O ( m), independent of the number of elements in the sets
                 themselves.
                       Linked lists are a set representation that maximizes the ease of representing
                 sets S (of size s) that are small subsets of their universe U. A typical doubly linked
                 representation is shown in Figure B .l(a). The size of the representation of S is O (s),
                 not O ( m), as it is for bit vectors. Performing the fundamental operations is harder
                 than for bit vectors. For example, the code for computing the union of A and B is
                 as shown in Figure B.2, where f i r s t ( ), n e x t( ), and l a s t ( ) traverse the linked
                 list and append ( ) adds its second argument to the end of its first. This requires
                 0 ( a b ) time, where a and b are the cardinalities of A and B, respectively, or 0 ( s 2).
                 O f course, in the worst case this is 0 (m2), but we are assuming that the sets A and B
                 have many fewer than u elements. Similar routines are needed to perform the other
                 operations, with similar time bounds, except that membership testing is O(s).
           Section B.l    Representation of Sets                                                761




           (a)


                                                             (b)




                                 (c)
FIG. B.3 (a) A balanced binary tree of identifiers; (b) the result of adding day, making the tree
         unbalanced; and (c) the result of rebalancing the tree.


                Balanced binary trees are an important representation of sets that have an easily
           computed total order among their elements (or that need to be kept ordered), such
           as the identifiers in a local symbol table. In such a tree, the value at each node is
           greater than all the values in its left subtree and less than all the values in its right
           subtree, and the lengths of the minimum and maximum paths from the root to a leaf
           differ by at most one. An example of a balanced binary tree representing the set of
           identifiers {bone, dog, ear, eye, limb, mouth, nose} is given in Figure B.3(a). In (b),
           we have added the value day to the set, resulting in the tree’s becoming unbalanced.
           Part (c) shows the result of rebalancing the tree. Note that membership in a set S
           represented by a balanced binary tree can be tested in time O (logs). Computing
           union, intersection, difference, equality testing, and subset require 0 ( s logs).
                Hashing is another important representation for sets. As generally formulated,
           it involves computing a function hash{ ) from elements of the set S c U to a range
762               R epresentation of Sets, Sequences, Trees, D AGs, and Functions


                                c= 4

                  d [ i]         i         s[i]
                           |         8     |
                                  7       T ~

                                  6
                                  5       ~2 ~
                  ~T             4         T~
                  T~             3
                  ~              2           1
                  ~   2
                      ~          1
      FIG. B.4 Sparse representation of the set {2, 5, 7, 4} with u = 8.


                  0 . . . . , u — 1 for some appropriate w. One then finds in entry hash(a) of an array
                  H ash[0*       1] a pointer to a linked list of entries (usually called “ buckets” ), each
                  corresponding to an element a of S that hashes to hash {a). The efficiency of the set
                  operations depends strongly on the choice of the hash function. Assuming that the
                  elements are distributed so that no more than 2 u/n elements hash to each entry,
                  testing membership requires 0 {u /ri) time; and union, intersection, equality, and
                  subset require O(u) time if the items in each hash chain are kept ordered.
                       A new representation of sparse sets that requires constant time for the basic
                  operations was developed by Briggs and Torczon [BriT93]. It represents a sparse set
                  S c U = { 1 , . . . , u) by two w-element arrays s[ ] and d[ ] and a scalar c. The value of
                  c is the cardinality of S. The array d[ ] holds in positions 1, . . . , c the c elements of
                  S in any order and the elements of s[ ] are set so that

                           1 < s[i] < c and d[s[i]] = i if and only if / e S

                  1. e., the /th element of s[ ] gives the position of i in the array d[ ]. The values in the
                  other entries of s[ ] and d[ ] do not matter. For example, Figure B.4 shows how the
                  set {2, 5, 7 , 4} would be represented with u = 8. The fundamental operations are
                  adding and removing an element, testing membership, and determining the size of
                  the set. We perform the operations as follows:
             1.   adding an element v: Check whether 1 < s[i/] < c and d[s[i/]] = v. If not, set c to c + 1,
                  d[c] to i/, and s[t/] to c.
            2.    removing an element v: Check whether 1 < s[i/] < c and d[s[v]] = v. If so, set d[s[v]]
                  to d[c], c to c — 1, and s[i/] := 0.
            3.    testing membership of v: Check whether 1 < s[i/] < c and d[s[i/]] = v. If so, answer
                  “ yes,” otherwise answer “ n o.”
            4.    determining size: Return c.
                       Two mixed representations can be useful in representing sparse sets for particu­
                  lar kinds of problems. Linked-segment lists combine the dynamic allocation of linked
             Section B.3    Representation of Trees and DAGs                                      763

            Head




  FIG. B.5 Representation of the set {5, 2, 11, 23, 94, 17} by a two-way linked-segment list.


             lists with the fast traversal of arrays. For example, Figure B.5 shows a linked-segment
             representation of the set {5, 2, 11, 23, 94, 17}. Bit-vector linked lists are similar, ex­
             cept that the values stored in the list elements are bit vectors. They are useful for
             bit-vector problems in which most of the bits are constant throughout the analysis.


B.2          Representation o f Sequences
             Sequences are almost as important as sets and, in fact, many of the representations
             carry over from sets to sequences, as long as we keep the members of the sequences
             in their predetermined order.
                  Some of the important operations for sequences are those listed near the begin­
             ning of the appendix, namely, adding a value, removing a value, testing membership,
             merging sequences, and determining the length of a sequence. Concatenation is also
             important.
                  Linked lists and linked-segment lists are common representations of sequences
             that allow the operations to be performed in time O (s), where s is the length of the
             sequence (note that this also includes concatenation, since all we need to do is splice
             the end of the first sequence to the beginning of the second).
                  Bit vectors, on the other hand, are not generally useful for representing se­
             quences, since they impose an order on the elements that usually is not the desired
             one.
                  Balanced binary trees are quite useful because they allow any chosen order to
             be imposed on their entries (one merely adjoins to each element its position in that
             ordering and uses it in rebalancing the trees), and because the operations on them
             are fast.


B.3         Representation o f Trees and DAGs
            Trees are important in several areas in compiling, such as parsing, code generation,
            and expression optimization. In most cases, the trees are binary— particularly for
            code generation and optimization— so we concentrate on that variety.
                Two representations of trees are frequently used, linked and linearized. The
            linked form usually involves nodes with at least four fields: parent, left child, right
764              Representation of Sets, Sequences, Trees, DAGs, and Functions




                 (a)                                          (b)
      FIG. B.6 (a) Linked representation of a binary tree, namely, an expression tree that represents
               (2 + x) —3; (b) the meanings of its fields.


                 child, and value, as shown in Figure B.6. Additional fields may represent other values
                 in each node.
                      Linearized notations for trees depend on the fact that a binary tree can always be
                 represented by its root, followed by the representation of its left subtree, followed by
                 the representation of its right subtree, i.e., in Polish-prefix notation. The linked rep­
                 resentation in Figure B.6 becomes - + 2 x 3 in this form. This type of representation
                 is used as intermediate code in some compilers and is the basis for Graham-Glanville-
                 style code generation (see Section 6.2).
                      DAGs, which are useful in optimizing and generating code for basic blocks and
                 in scheduling them (see Section 17.1.2), are almost always represented by linked
                 structures.


B.4              Representation o f Functions
                 Functions are used to represent mappings of various sorts in compilers, such as map­
                 ping basic blocks and flowgraph edges to their execution frequencies, representing
                 aliases, and so on.
                      The most efficient representation of a function requires that it have a domain
                 that is composed of simple types and a result of a simple type, and that the function
                 is easily computed from the domain elements, such as f ( x, y , z ) = x + 2 * y - z .
                 Such functions are, of course, typically represented by code.
                      The next most efficient representation of a function is to use an array. For this
                 approach to be usable, the components of the domain must be ranges of integers or
                 easily mapped to ranges of integers and the values of the function must be of uniform
                 size or reached by pointers stored in the array elements.
                      Flashing provides an attractive alternative for functions that do not easily map
                 onto arrays. In this approach, one hashes the domain elements to determine a list of
                 buckets and then searches the bucket list to find an entry that matches the arguments
                 and that holds the corresponding function value.
            Section B.5     Further Reading                                                   765

                          ^B3a           in (B4a)




                  FB4a            f B3              in (B4)




                   n



            id            f B6



  FIG. B.7 DAG representation of structural data-flow equations.


                 The operation most frequently performed on functions is computing a value
            when given a sequence of arguments, which is trivial to easy for each of the three
            representations discussed above.
                 Less frequently, one may need to compose two functions or to modify one, either
            by changing its domain or by changing a value or both. Composition is easiest for
            the code representation, of course, and only somewhat harder for the other two.
            Modifying a function is generally not possible for the code representation, but can
            be accommodated by the other two.
                 Another kind of function representation is one designed to be constructed by
            a program and then used repeatedly to compute values, such as in control-tree-
            based data-flow analysis (see Section 8.6). In this case, we need to construct a data
            structure that can then be interpreted, such as the graphs discussed in Section 8.7.3.
            Figure B.7 is an example of such a graph. The roots are the names of functions to
            be computed and the subgraph below each says how to compute it (“ o” represents
            function composition, “ ( )” represents function application, “ n ” represents the
            lattice operation meet, and id represents the identity function). Such graphs can
            easily be constructed and then can be interpreted as needed to compute data-flow
            information.


B.5         Further Reading
            For the details of how to keep binary trees balanced and descriptions of other data
            structures that are valuable in compiler construction, see any good data structures
            text, such as Knuth [Knut73].
                 Briggs and Torczon’s new representation for sparse sets is described in [BriT93].
                                                                                   APPENDIX C




                                Software Resources




T
         his appendix describes software that is freely available on the Internet or
         through other means of distribution for use in student compiler-construction
         projects. Most of the software packages carry licenses that restrict their use
         to educational projects; some may be incorporated into commercial products with
explicit restrictions. This entire appendix may be accessed online at the publisher’s
Web site, with links to all Internet, WWW, and ftp addresses in this appendix. The
URL for this book is h t t p :/ /w w w . m k p .c o m / b o o k s _ c a t a l o g / l - 5 5 8 6 0 - 3 2 0 - 4 . a s p .


Finding and Accessing Software on the Internet
The resources listed here are only a few of the many software packages available that
may be useful in compiler-related projects. Information about others may be found
on the World Wide Web (WWW) by means of one or another search engine, such
as Yahoo, Alta Vista, Lycos, Infoseek, etc. Numerous references such as [Krol92]
and [Keho93] provide information about accessing and using such search engines.


Machine Simulators
Spim
James Larus of the University of Wisconsin has written a mips R2000 and R3000
simulator called spim that is available for use in student projects and that is described
in detail in Appendix A of [HenP94].
      s p im can read and execute files that contain assembly-language statements and
m ip s a . o u t files. It is a self-contained system that includes a debugger and an
768      Software Resources


         operating-system interface and runs on at least DEC, Sun, IBM, and HP work­
         stations.
              spim implements almost the entire mips extended assembler instruction set (ex­
         cluding some of the complex floating-point comparisons and the details of page-table
         manipulation). It comes with complete source code and documentation of all in­
         structions. It has both a simple, terminal-style interface and an X-Windows-based
         interface.
              As we go to press, a DOS version and a new Windows version of spim are being
         developed. The Windows version will run under Windows 3.1, Windows 95, and
         Windows NT. In the fall of 1997, look for information about these new versions on
         the publisher’s Web site at h t t p : / / www.mkp. com/cod2e. htm.
              To retrieve a compressed tar file containing the spim system and documenta­
         tion, access the URL h ttp ://w w w .cs.w isc.e d u /-la ru s/sp im .h tm l and follow the
         instructions found there. To be informed of future updates to the system, send your
         electronic mail address to laru s@ cs.w isc .ed u .


C.2.2    Spa
         Spa is a set of tools that includes a sparc simulator and that was written by Gordon
         Irlam of the University of Adelaide in Australia. To find out more about it, access
         the file go rd on i/sp a.h tm l at the URL http://w w w .base.com .


C.3      Compilers
C.3.1    GNU
         The GNU compilers were written by contributors to the Free Software Foundation
         and may be freely distributed and modified. They may be included in commercial
         products if certain conditions are met. Contact the foundation at 675 Massachusetts
         Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 for information.
              To obtain the GNU compiler source, establish an anonymous ftp connection to
         p re p . a i . mi t . edu, f t p . uu. net, or any of several other machines around the world,
         and retrieve the compressed tar file p u b /g n u /g cc-^ rs/o w .ta r.g z where version is
         the highest version number available. The file GETTING.GNU.SOFTWARE in the same
         directory may be helpful to the beginner.


C .3.2   LCC
         lc c is an easily retargetable ansi C compiler written by Christopher Fraser and
         David Hanson that is available by anonymous ftp from ftp .p rin c e to n .e d u in the
         directory p u b /lcc. It is suggested that you begin by retrieving the file README from
         that directory. The front end was adapted for use in the suif system (see below), lc c
         can also be obtained from the URL h t t p : //www. c s . p rin c e to n . ed u /so f tw are/lcc
         on the World Wide Web.
              The compiler contains no optimizer, but its intermediate code is suitable for most
         of the optimizations discussed in this book.
                Section C.4         Code-Generator Generators: BURG and IBURG                                  769

                    The compiler is described briefly in [FraH91b] and in detail in [FraH95]. If you
               wish to be added to the lc c mailing list, send e-mail with the one-line message
               su b sc rib e lc c to m ajordom o@ cs.princeton.edu. For more information, access
               the World Wide Web site h t t p : //www. c s . p rin c e to n . ed u /so f tw a re /lcc .

C.3.3           SUIF
                s u if is an experimental compiling system that was developed by Monica Lam and
                colleagues at Stanford University.1 It consists of the intermediate format, the kernel
                components of a compiler, and a functional parallelizing compiler that translates C
                or Fortran 77 to m ip s code. The release includes, among other things:
         1.     C and Fortran front ends,
        2.      an array data-dependence analysis library,
        3.     a lo o p -tran sfo rm atio n library (based on u n im od u lar tran sfo rm atio n s an d tiling),

        4.     a m atrix an d linear-inequality m an ip u lation library,

        5.     a parallel co de gen erator an d run-tim e library,

        6.     a sc alar optim izer,

         7.    a m ip s back end,

         8.    a C back end (so a native C co m piler can be used as a b ack end for non-MiPS
               system s),

        9.     a linear-inequality calculator (for prototyping algorithms), and
        10   . a simplified interface that can be used for compiler courses.
                    s u i f is available on the World Wide Web from URL

                    h t t p :/ / s u if .s t a n f o r d .e d u
               s u if is released without warranty and with no promise of support. It is available free
               for noncommercial use. Redistribution is prohibited.
                     s u i f is not meant to be a production-quality compiler. It does not run as fast, nor
               generate code as efficiently, as a production compiler such as gcc or your machine’s
               native compiler. It does, however, compile most major benchmarks and can be used
               as a base for student projects or compiler research.


C.4             Code-Generator Generators: BURG and IBURG
               burg,  a code-generator generator based on b u r s technology (see [Pele88] and
               [PelG88]), was written by Christopher Fraser, Robert Henry, and Todd Proebst-
               ing and is available by anonymous ftp from k a e se .c s.w isc .e d u . It is provided as
               a compressed sh ar archive located in file pub /b urg. s h a r . Z. [FraH91a] provides an
               overview of the system and how to use it.

                1. The name suif stands for Stanford University Intermediate Form.
770     Software Resources


            iburg , another code-generator generator based on burs technology, but that
        does dynamic programming at compile time, was written by Fraser, Hanson, and
        Proebsting [FraH92] and is available by anonymous ftp from
            f t p . c s . p rin c e to n . edu
        It is provided as a compressed t a r archive located in file p u b /ib u rg .ta r.Z or
        p u b /ib u rg. t a r .z ip . [FraH92] provides an overview of the system and how to
        use it.


C.5     Profiling Tools
C.5.1   QPT
        QPT is an exact and efficient program profiler and tracing system that was written
        by Thomas Ball and James Larus of the University of Wisconsin. It rewrites a pro­
        gram’s executable (a.o u t) file by inserting code to record the execution frequency
        or sequence of every basic block or control-flow edge. From this information, an­
        other program, called QPT_STATS, calculates the execution costs of procedures
        in the program. Unlike the unix tools p rof and g p ro f, QPT records exact exe­
        cution frequencies rather than statistical samples. When tracing a program, QPT
        produces a trace regeneration program that reads the highly compressed trace file
        and generates the full program trace. To obtain QPT and its documentation, access
        the URL h ttp ://w w w .c s.w isc .e d u /-la ru s/q p t.h tm l and follow the instructions
        found there.
            When used for profiling, QPT operates in either of two modes. In slow mode, it
        places a counter in each basic block in a program. In quick mode, it places counters
        on an infrequently executed subset of the edges in the program’s control-flow graph.
        This placement can reduce the cost of profiling by a factor of three or four, but
        increases somewhat the time required to produce a profile or trace.
            QPT currently runs on SPARC-based systems and is written to be portable—all
        of the machine-specific features are collected in a few files. Porting the program to a
        new machine requires about two person-months’ worth of effort. QPT is distributed
        with the full source and a small amount of documentation.
            QPT is part of a larger project called WARTS (Wisconsin Architectural Research
        Tool Set), which is accessible at URL

            h t t p : //www. c s . w ise . e d u /- la r u s /w a r ts .html

C.5.2   SpixTools and Shade
        SpixTools is a collection of programs that were written by Robert Cmelik of Sun
        Microsystems to allow instruction-level profiling of sparc application programs.
        [Cmel93] provides both a tutorial introduction to and a reference manual for Spix­
        Tools.
            Spix creates an instrumented version of the user’s program. As the instrumented
        program runs, it keeps track of how often each basic block is executed and writes out
Section C.5       Profiling Tools                                                 771

the block execution counts on termination. Several tools are provided for displaying
and summarizing these counts. S p i x s t a t s prints tables that show opcode usage,
branch behavior, register usage, function usage, etc. S d as disassembles the applica­
tion program, annotating the disassembled code with instruction execution counts.
S p r in t prints the source code of the application, annotating it with statement or
instruction counts.
      Applications that use SpixTools must be statically linked and must not use self­
modifying code. A few other limitations apply.
      Shade is an instruction-set simulator and custom trace generator that was writ­
ten by David Keppel and Robert Cmelik. It executes and traces application programs
under the control of a user-supplied trace analyzer. To reduce communication over­
head, Shade and the analyzer are run in the same address space. To further improve
performance, code that simulates and traces the application is dynamically generated
and cached for reuse. Current implementations run on sparc systems and, to vary­
ing degrees, simulate the sparc Version 8 and Version 9 and m ips i architectures.
[CmeK93] describes the capabilities, design, implementation, and performance of
Shade and discusses instruction-set simulation in general.
      Shade provides fine-grained control over tracing, so one pays data-collection
overhead only for the data actually needed. Shade is also extensible, so analyzers can
examine arbitrary state and thus collect special information that Shade itself does
not know how to collect.
      SpixTools and Shade are both available on the Web at URL

    h t t p : //www. su n . c o m /m ic ro e le c tro n ic s/sh a d e /
                                                                          Illu stratio n s




1.1   High-level structure of a simple compiler.   2

1.2   A code fragment (assuming v2 is positive) in (a) hir , (b) mir , and (c) lir with symbolic
      registers. 5
1.3   SSA form of the example in Figure 1.2. Note the splitting of s2 into three variables s2 i,
      s 22, and s 2 3 , and the 0-function at the entry to block B2. 5

1.4   A C code fragment in (a) with naive sparc code generated for it in (b) and optimized
      code in (c). 7

1.5   Two high-level structures for an optimizing compiler: (a) the low-level model, with all
      optimization done on a low-level intermediate code, and (b) the mixed model, with
      optimization divided into two phases, one operating on each of a medium-level and a
      low-level intermediate code. 8
1.6   Adding data-cache optimization to an optimizing compiler. The continuation is to
      either the translator in the low-level model in Figure 1.5(a) or to the intermediate-code
      generator in the mixed model in Figure 1.5(b). 10

1.7   Order of optimizations.    12
1.8   Examples of (a) the effect of doing scalar replacement of aggregates after constant
      propagation, and (b) before constant propagation. 14
1.9   Reading flow among the chapters in this book.      15

2.1   A sample ican global declaration and procedure (the line numbers at left are not part of
      the code). 21
2.2   A second example of ican code (the line numbers at left are not part of the code).      22
2.3   An example ican procedure declaration.       24
2.4   (a) An ican for loop that iterates over a set, and (b) equivalent code using a while
      loop. 32
3.1   (a) A series of Pascal type declarations, and (b) its representation by ican tuples.   47

3.2   Hashed local symbol table with a chain of buckets for each hash key.      49

                                                                                             773
774          Illu stratio n s


       3.3   Nesting structure of an example Pascal program.             50
       3.4   Tree of local symbol tables for the Pascal code in Figure 3.3.                  50
       3.5   Symbol-table stacks occurring during compiling the Pascal code in Figure 3.3.                       51
       3.6   Hashed global symbol table with a block stack.            51
       3.7   An example of code with an import.           53
       3.8   (a) Hashed global symbol table with innermost level numbers, and (b) after entering
             g ( ), a scope with local variable d and imported symbols a and b. 53
       3.9   Routines to do storage binding of local variables.          56
      3.10   (a) A mir fragment and two translations to lir , one with names bound to storage
             locations (b) and the other with simple variables bound to symbolic registers (c). 57
      3.11   C local variable declarations.       58
      3.12   (a) Unsorted aligned and (b) sorted frame layouts for the declarations shown in
             Figure 3.11 (offsets in bytes). 58
      3.13   Global types and data structures used to generate loads and stores.                  60
      3.14   Routines to load and store, respectively, a variable’s value to or from a register, register
             pair, or quadruple. 61
      3.15   Auxiliary routines used in generating loads and stores.               62
       4.1   (a) High-, (b) medium-, and (c) low-level representations of a C array reference.                    69
       4.2   A tiny C routine whose abstract syntax tree is given in Figure 4.3.                  70
       4.3   Abstract syntax tree for the C routine in Figure 4.2.            70
       4.4   A mir fragment in (a) with alternative pa-risc code sequences generated for it in (b)
             and (c). 72
       4.5   Example pair of C procedures.         77
       4.6   mir code for the pair of C procedures in Figure 4.5.             77
       4.7   (a) Form of the hir f o r loop, and (b) its semantics in mir .             79
       4.8   Types and functions used to determine properties of mir instructions.                     85
       4.9   The body of the mir program unit in sert_ n od e in Figure 4.6 represented by ican
             tuples. 86
      4.10   ican types and functions to determine properties of hir instructions.                     88
      4.11   ican data types and functions to determine properties of lir instructions.                     90
      4.12   An example of lir code to be represented by ican tuples.                   91
      4.13   The sequence of ican tuples corresponding to the lir code in Figure 4.12.                      91
      4.14   The ican routines in s e r t _ b e fo r e ( ), i n s e r t _ a f t e r ( ), and append_block( ) that
             insert an instruction into a basic block before or after a given position or append an
             instruction to a block. 93
       Illustrations                                                                                  775


4.15   The ican routine d e le t e _ in s t ( ) that deletes an instruction at a given position from a
       basic block. 94
4.16   The ican routine in s e r t_ b lo c k ( ) that splits an edge by inserting a block between the
       two given blocks. 94
4.17   The ican routine d e le te _ b lo c k ( ) that removes an empty basic block.        95
4.18   (a) A mir code fragment for comparison to other intermediate-code forms, and (b) its
       translation to triples. 97
4.19   Alternative forms of trees: (a) with an explicit assignment operator, and (b) with the
       result variable labeling the root node of its computation tree. 97
4.20   Translation of the (non-control-flow) mir code in Figure 4.18(a) to a sequence of simple
       trees. 98
4.21   Minimized tree form of the (non-control-flow) mir code in Figure 4.18(a).                98
4.22   Result of trying to translate the mir instructions a <- a + 1; b           a + a to a single
       tree. 99
4.23   Example of translation from minimized tree form to mir code.           99
4.24   DAG for the non-control-flow code of mir code in Figure 4.18(a).             100
4.25   Example basic block of mir code to be converted to a DAG.            101
4.26   Graphic form of the DAG corresponding to the m ir code in Figure 4.25.               101
4.27   Polish-prefix form of the trees in Figure 4.21 divided into instructions.          101

 5.1   Two C structs, one unpacked in (a) and the other packed in (b).        108
 5.2   Representation of the structures in Figure 5.1.     108
 5.3   An example of sets in Pascal.     109
 5.4   A stack frame with the current and old stack pointers.       112
 5.5   A stack frame with frame and stack pointers.       113
 5.6   An example of nested procedures for static link determination.         115
 5.7   (a) Static nesting structure of the seven procedures and calls among them in Figure 5.6,
       and (b) their static links during execution (after entering g ( ) from 1( )). 116
 5.8   Call by name parameter-passing mechanism in Algol 60.           119
 5.9   Structure of the stack frame for the procedure-calling example with parameters passed
       in registers. 122
5.10   Structure of the stack frame for the procedure-calling example with parameters passed
       on the run-time stack for the Intel 386 architecture family. 124

5.11   sparc register windows for three successive procedures.        125
5.12   Structure of the stack frame for the procedure-calling example with register windows
       (s/u means structure or union). 126
776          Illu stratio n s


      5.13   A procedure descriptor containing a procedure’s address and its static link.     126
      5.14   An example of a shared library’s table of contents.     128
      5.15   sparc PLT (a) before loading, and (b) after two routines have been dynamically
             linked.     131
      5.16   A lisp list cell and a sparc tagged pointer to it.   132
       6.1   (a) lir instructions, (b) Graham-Glanville machine-description rules, and (c)
             corresponding sparc instruction templates. 140
       6.2   A lir code sequence for Graham-Glanville code generation.            140
       6.3   Trees corresponding to the lir code sequence in Figure 6.2.         141
       6.4   (a) Parsing process and (b) emitted instructions for the trees in Figure 6.3.    141
       6.5   The code-generation algorithm.      143
       6.6   Constructing the SLR (l) parsing tables.    144
       6.7   The functions Uniform( ), C lo su re ( ), and Advance( ) used in constructing the
             SLR (l) parsing tables. 146
       6.8   (a) lir instructions, (b) Graham-Glanville machine-description rules, and (c)
             corresponding sparc instruction templates. 148
       6.9   Relations, sets, and functions for our example machine-description grammar in
             Figure 6.8. 149
      6.10   Action/Next table for the machine-description grammar given in Figure 6.8.        150
      6.11   The code-generation automaton produced for the machine-description grammar in
             Figure 6.8. 151
      6.12   Parsing automaton for the example grammar that has a chain loop.           152
      6.13   The procedure Elim_Chain_Loops( ) to eliminate chain loops of nonterminals and the
             procedure C lo se ( ) used by this procedure. 153
      6.14   The procedures Reach( ) andP run e( ) u se d b y C lo se ( ).       154
      6.15   Fragment of a machine-description grammar for Hewlett-Packard’s pa-risc addressing
             modes. 155
      6.16   Derivation sequence for the tree form of T + r * c r.      155
      6.17   Routines to repair syntactic blocking by generalizing one or more nonterminals.         156
      6.18   A simple tree-rewriting system.    161
      6.19   Specification in twig corresponding to the tree-rewriting system in Figure 6.18.       162
      6.20   Tree-matching path strings for the rules in Figure 6.18.      163
      6.21   Tree-matching automaton for the rules in Figure 6.18.         164
       7.1   A C routine that computes Fibonacci numbers.         170
       Illustrations                                                                              777


 7.2   mir intermediate code for the C routine in Figure 7.1.           170
 7.3   Flowchart corresponding to Figure 7.2.        171
 7.4   Flowgraph corresponding to Figure 7.3.        172
 7.5   Dominance tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.4.           172
 7.6   A pair of routines to construct the set of blocks in the extended basic block with a given
       root. 176
 7.7   A routine to construct all the extended basic blocks in a given flowgraph.           176
 7.8   Flowgraph with extended basic blocks indicated by the dashed boxes.            177
 7.9   (a) A rooted directed graph, and (b) a depth-first presentation of it.       178
7.10   A generic depth-first search routine.   179
7.11   (a) A rooted directed graph and (b) and (c) two distinct depth-first presentations of
       it. 179
7.12   Computing a depth-first spanning tree, preorder traversal, and postorder traversal.        180
7.13   Computing a breadth-first order.    181
7.14   A simple approach to computing all the dominators of each node in a flowgraph.             182
7.15   Computing immediate dominators, given sets of dominators.              184
7.16   A more complicated but faster approach to computing dominators.              186
7.17   Depth-first search and path-compression algorithms used in computing
       dominators. 187
7.18   Label evaluation and linking algorithms used in computing dominators.              188
7.19   For v and w to satisfy Dfn(v) < Dfn(w), w may be in any of the positions of v, a , b, or c,
       where b is some descendant of u visited after all the tree descendants of v. A dotted arrow
       represents a possibly empty path, and a dashed arrow represents a non-empty path. 189
7.20   (a) A rooted directed graph and (b) a depth-first presentation of it.        192
7.21   Computing the natural loop of back edge m->n.             192
7.22   Example loop (a) without and (b) with preheader.           193
7.23   Two natural loops with the same header Bl.          193
7.24   Alternative C code sequences that would both produce the flowgraph in
       Figure 7.23. 194
7.25   A flowgraph with two strongly connected components, one maximal and one not
       maximal. 194
7.26   Computing strongly connected components.            195
7.27   Simple improper regions.    197
778          Illu stratio n s


      7.28   Result of applying node splitting to B3 in the improper region shown in
             Figure 7.27(a). 197
      7.29   T1-T2 transformations.      198
      7.30   Example of T1-T2 transformations.         199

      7.31   T1-T2 control tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.30.          199
      7.32   An example of the difference between (a) maximal intervals and (b) minimal
             intervals. 200
      7.33   Example of interval analysis.     201
      7.34   Control tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.33.        201
      7.35   Some types of acyclic regions used in structural analysis.          203
      7.36   Some types of cyclic regions used in structural analysis.          203
      7.37   An acyclic region that does not fit any of the simple categories and so is identified as a
             proper interval. 204
      7.38   Global data structures used in structural analysis.         205
      7.39   The structural analysis algorithm.      206
      7.40   Computing a postorder traversal of the nodes in a flowgraph.              207

      7.41   Routine to identify the type of an acyclic structure.        208
      7.42   Routine to identify the type of a cyclic structure.     208
      7.43   Region-reduction routine for structural analysis.       209
      7.44   Routine to do node and edge replacement and control-tree building for structural
             analysis. 210
      7.45   Improper-interval minimization routine for structural analysis.            210
      7.46   Structural analysis of a flowgraph.     211
      7.47   Depth-first spanning tree for the flowgraph in Figure 7.46(a).            212
      7.48   Control tree for the flowgraph analyzed in Figure 7.46.            213
      7.49   Two examples of improper intervals.       213
      7.50   An example graph to which to apply the algorithm Strong_Components( ) in
             Figure 7.26. 216
       8.1   Example of undecidability of reaching definitions and dependence on input values.      219
       8.2   BV 3, the lattice of three-element bit vectors.   224
       8.3   Integer constant-propagation lattice ICP.       225
       8.4   Flowgraph for which associating data-flow information with edges produces better
             results than associating it with node entries. 228
       Illustrations                                                                                       779

 8.5   Example that differentiates reaching definitions from upwards exposed uses.                   230
 8.6   Worklist algorithm for iterative data-flow analysis (statements that manage the worklist
       are marked with asterisks). 232
 8.7   Flow functions for structural analysis of an if- th e n construct.          237
 8.8   Flow functions for structural analysis of an if- t h e n - e ls e construct.       238
 8.9   Flow functions for structural analysis of a while loop.         239
8.10   An improper region.      241
8.11   Structural control-flow analysis of our reaching definitions example.             242
8.12   Flow functions for backward structural analysis of an if- t h e n - e ls e construct.           244
8.13   An acyclic region A for backward structural analysis.         246
8.14   Code representation of some of the structural data-flow equations for an if- th e n -
       e ls e . 248
8.15   Graphic representation of some of the structural data-flow equations for the region B la
       in Figure 8.10. 248
8.16   Interval control-flow analysis of our reaching definitions example.           249
8.17   (a) Example for construction of webs and (b) the webs.          252
8.18   Standard translation of the example in Figure 8.17 into SSA form.             253
8.19   Code to compute the dominance frontier of a flowgraph.              255
8.20   Code to compute the iterated dominance frontier of a flowgraph.              256
8.21   Example flowgraph to be translated to minimal SSA form.               256
8.22   Dominator tree for the flowgraph in Figure 8.21.        257
8.23   Result of translating the flowgraph in Figure 8.21 to minimal SSA form.                 257
8.24   Assignments involving array elements and their translation into access/update
       form. 259
8.25   Simple example for constant-propagation analysis.         261
8.26   Simple factorial computation.      262
8.27   Full factorial computation.    262
 9.1   Example of control and data dependence in mir code.           268
 9.2   The dependence graph for the code in Figure 9.1.        268
 9.3   (a) A basic block of lir code, and (b) its dependence DAG.            270
 9.4   (a) A more complex lir example, and (b) its dependence DAG.                 270
 9.5   Computing the Latency ( ) function.        272
780           Illustrations


        9.6   Algorithm to construct the dependence DAG for basic-block scheduling.                 274
        9.7   A canonical loop nest.    275
        9.8   An example of a doubly nested loop.          276
        9.9   The iteration-space traversal for the code in Figure 9.8.         276
       9.10   A doubly nested loop with a nonrectangular iteration-space traversal.               276
       9.11   The trapezoidal iteration-space traversal of the loop nest in Figure 9.10.            277
       9.12   The dependence relations for the code in Figure 9.8.            277
       9.13   An assignment SI with the distance vector (1, 0).          279
       9.14   Two example hir loops for dependence testing.             279
       9.15   Form of the hir loop nest assumed for dependence testing.               281
       9.16   An example of weak separability.       283
       9.17   Flowgraph from Figure 7.4 with s t a r t node added.            285
       9.18   Postdominance tree for the flowgraph in Figure 9.17.             285
       9.19   Basic control-dependence graph for the flowgraph in Figure 9.17.              286
       9.20   Control-dependence graph with region nodes for the flowgraph in Figure 9.17.                    286
       9.21   (a) Example of a C type declaration for a recursive data structure, and (b) axioms that
              apply to structures built from it. 287
       9.22   Example of a C function that uses structures of the type defined in Figure 9.21.                288
       10.1   Simple pointer aliasing in C.    294
       10.2   Relationship between the variables at the call to p r in t f ( ) in Figure 10.1.          294
       10.3   Example of the importance of alias computation.            294
       10.4   Different aliases in different parts of a procedure.       297
       10.5   A flowgraph that provides examples of aliasing concepts.               303
       10.6   One of Coutant’s C aliasing examples.         309
       10.7   Flowgraph for the C code in Figure 10.6.           309
       10.8   mir code for the C program fragment in Figure 10.6 annotated with aliasing
              information. 311
       10.9   A second example for alias analysis in C.          311
      10.10   Flowgraph for the C code in Figure 10.9.           311
      10.11   A third example for alias analysis in C.      313
      10.12   Flowgraph for the C code in Figure 10.11.           313
      10.13   An example C procedure for alias analysis.          317
        Illustrations                                                                                781

 11.1   Order of optimizations.      326
 12.1   An algorithm for performing constant-expression evaluation.               330
 12.2   A simple example for scalar replacement of aggregates in C.              332
 12.3   Main procedure resulting from procedure integration and scalar replacement of
        aggregates for the program in Figure 12.2. 332
 12.4   Main procedure after constant propagation and dead-code elimination for the program
        in Figure 12.3. 333
 12.5   A Pascal fragment that accesses elements of an array.              336
 12.6   Tree transformations to do simplification of addressing expressions.            337
 12.7   Tree for the address of the Pascal expression a [ i , j ] and the first stages of simplifying
        it. 339
 12.8   Further stages of simplifying the address of a [ i , j ] .       340
 12.9   Final stages of simplifying the address of a [ i , j ] .     341
12.10   Another Pascal fragment that accesses elements of an array.              341
12.11   mir examples that show that value numbering, constant propagation, and common-
        subexpression elimination are incomparable. 343
12.12   Value numbering in a basic block. The sequence of instructions in (a) is replaced by the
        one in (b). Note the recognition of the expressions in the first and second instructions
        as being identical modulo commutativity and the conversion of the b i n i f in the fourth
        instruction to an assignment and a v a l i f . 344
12.13   Code to perform value numbering in a basic block.             345
12.14   Code to remove killed expressions from the hash function’s bucket sequence.            347
12.15   (a) An example basic block, (b) the result of applying value numbering to its first three
        instructions, and (c) the result of applying value numbering to the whole block. Note
        that the i f in line 3 has been replaced by two instructions, the first to evaluate the
        condition and the second to perform the conditional branch. 347
12.16   A short example program fragment for which to construct the value graph.              349
12.17   Value graph for the code in Figure 12.16.        349
12.18   Example flowgraph for global value numbering.              350
12.19   Minimal SSA form for the flowgraph in Figure 12.18.                350
12.20   Value graph for the code in Figure 12.19.        351
12.21   Partitioning algorithm to do global value numbering by computing congruence.                352
12.22   Auxiliary routines used by the partitioning algorithm.             354
12.23   (a) Example of a copy assignment to propagate, namely, b <- a in B l, and (b) the result
        of doing copy propagation on it. 357
782           Illu stratio n s


      12.24   O(n) algorithm for local copy propagation.    357

      12.25   An example of the linear-time local copy-propagation algorithm.      359

      12.26   Another example for copy propagation.     360

      12.27   Flowgraph from Figure 12.26 after copy propagation.     361

      12.28   Copy assignments not detected by global copy propagation.      362

      12.29   (a) Example of a constant assignment to propagate, namely, b <- 3 in Bl, and (b) the
              result of doing constant propagation on it. 363

      12.30   The constant-propagation lattice C onstLat.     364

      12.31   SSA-based algorithm for sparse conditional constant propagation.          365

      12.32   Auxiliary routines for sparse conditional constant propagation.     366

      12.33   A simple example for sparse conditional constant propagation.       368

      12.34   Another example for sparse conditional constant propagation.        368

      12.35   Minimal SSA form of the program in Figure 12.34 with one instruction per basic
              block. 369

      12.36   The result of doing sparse conditional constant propagation on the routine shown in
              Figure 12.35. 370

      12.37   Order of optimizations. The ones discussed in this chapter are highlighted in bold
              type. 372

       13.1   (a) Example of a common subexpression, namely, a + 2, and (b) the result of doing
              common-subexpression elimination on it. 379

       13.2   A routine to do local common-subexpression elimination.       380

       13.3   Example basic block before local common-subexpression elimination.              382

       13.4   Our example basic block after eliminating the first local common subexpression (lines
              1, 2, and 5). 383

       13.5   Our example basic block after eliminating the second local common subexpression
              (line 7). 383

       13.6   Our example basic block after eliminating the third local common subexpression.       384

       13.7   Our example basic block after eliminating the last two local common
              subexpressions. 385
       13.8   Example flowgraph for global common-subexpression elimination.            386

       13.9   A routine to implement our first approach to global common-subexpression
              elimination. 389

      13.10   Our example flowgraph from Figure 13.8 after global common-subexpression
              elimination. 390
        Illustrations                                                                              783


13.11   Routines to implement our second approach to global common-subexpression
        elimination. 392

13.12   Combining common-subexpression elimination with copy propagation: (a) the original
        flowgraph, and (b) the result of local common-subexpression elimination. 394

13.13   Combining common-subexpression elimination with copy propagation (continued from
        Figure 13.12): (a) after global common-subexpression elimination, and (b) after local
        copy propagation. 395

13.14   Combining common-subexpression elimination with copy propagation (continued from
        Figure 13.13): after global copy propagation. Note that dead-code elimination can now
        eliminate the assignments t2     t3 and t l    t3 in block B1 and that code hoisting
        (Section 13.5) can move the two evaluations of t3 + t3 to block Bl. 395

13.15   In (a), two registers are needed along the edge from block Bl to B2, while in (b), three
        registers are needed. 396

13.16   (a) Example of loop-invariant computations in Fortran, and (b) the result of
        transforming it. 398

13.17   Code to mark loop-invariant instructions in a loop body.        398

13.18   An example for loop-invariant code motion.        400

13.19   Example of a computation in (a) for which reassociation results in recognition of a
        loop-invariant in (b). 402

13.20   Illustrations of two flaws in our basic approach to code motion. In both cases, if n <- 2
        is moved to the preheader, it is always executed, although originally it might have been
        executed only in some iterations or in none. 402

13.21   Code to move loop-invariant instructions out of a loop body.          404

13.22   The result of applying loop-invariant code motion to the flowgraph in
        Figure 13.18. 405

13.23   Loop-invariant code motion on nested Fortran loops (invariants are underlined).           406

13.24   An example of a reduction.      407

13.25   In (a), the edge from Bl to B4 is a critical edge. In (b), it has been split by the introduction
        of Bla. 408

13.26   An example of partially redundant expressions.        409

13.27   The example from Figure 13.26 with the edges from B2 to B5 and B3 to B5 split. The
        new blocks B2a and B3a have been added to the flowgraph. 409

13.28   The result of applying modern partial-redundancy elimination to the example in
        Figure 13.27. 414

13.29   An example of the weakness of strength reduction when it is derived from partial-
        redundancy elimination. The hir code in (a) can be strength-reduced to the code in
784           Illustrations


              (b) by the algorithm in Section 14.1.2, but not by the method derived from partial-
              redundancy elimination, because it does not recognize i as a loop invariant in the
              inner loop. 415
      13.30   Only common-subexpression elimination applies to the loop in A, producing the one
              in B. 415
      13.31   Combining common-subexpression elimination and loop-invariant code motion with
              reassociation results in more possible transformation sequences and an improved result,
              compared to Figure 13.30. 416
      13.32   Combining partial-redundancy elimination with reassociation produces the same result
              as in Figure 13.31. 416
      13.33   An example for code hoisting.      417
      13.34   An ic a n routine to perform code hoisting.    419

      13.35   The result of performing code hoisting on the example program in Figure 13.33.         420

      13.36   Place of redundancy-related optimizations (highlighted in bold type) in an aggressive
              optimizing compiler. 421

       14.1   Form of a fo r loop in C.    425
       14.2   An example of induction variables in Fortran 77. The value assigned to a ( i ) in (a)
              decreases by 2 in each iteration of the loop. It can be replaced by the variable t l , as
              shown in (b), replacing a multiplication by an addition in the process. 426

       14.3   In (a), the m i r form of the loop in Figure 14.2(b) and, in (b), the same code with
              induction variable i eliminated, the loop-invariant assignments t3 <- addr a and
              t4 <- t3 - 4 removed from the loop, strength reduction performed on t5, and induction
              variable i removed. 427
       14.4   The result of biasing the value of t4 in the code in Figure 14.3(b) so that a test against 0
              can be used for termination of the loop. Loop inversion (see Section 18.5) has also been
              performed. 427

       14.5   Example of splitting a basic induction variable with two modifications (a) into two
              induction variables (b). 428

       14.6   Template for splitting a basic induction variable with two modifications (a) into two
              induction variables (b). 429

       14.7   Code to identify induction variables.    430
       14.8   Auxiliary routines used in identifying induction variables.     432

       14.9   A second example for induction-variable identification.       434
      14.10   Code to strength-reduce induction variables.     437

      14.11   In (a), the m i r form of the loop in Figure 14.3(a) and, in (b), the same code with strength
              reduction performed on the induction variable t5. 439
        Illustrations                                                                              785

14.12   The result of removing the loop invariants t3 and t4 and strength-reducing t6 in the
        code in Figure 14.11(b). 439
14.13   The result of removing loop invariants from the inner loop of our second example,
        Figure 14.9, and deleting the outer loop, except B3, which is the preheader of the
        inner loop. 440
14.14   The result of strength-reducing t l 2 on the code in Figure 14.13.     441
14.15   The result of strength-reducing t l 3 on the partial flowgraph in Figure 14.14.      443
14.16   The result of strength-reducing the remaining induction variables in the partial
        flowgraph in Figure 14.15. 444
14.17   The result of doing constant folding and elimination of trivial assignments in block B3
        for the partial flowgraph in Figure 14.16. 445
14.18   Example flowgraph for computing live variables.         446
14.19   Examples of useless induction variables in Fortran 77 code.     447
14.20   Transformed versions of code in Figure 14.12: (a) after removing the induction variable
        t5, and (b) after removing t7 also. 448
14.21   Result of induction-variable removal (of i and t6) and linear-function test replacement
        on variable i in the code in Figure 14.20(b). 449
14.22   Code to implement removal of induction variables and linear-function test
        replacement. 450
14.23   Example of mir bounds-checking code for accessing the array element b [ i , j ] in
        Pascal. 455
14.24   Pascal example in which no bounds-checking code is needed for accessing b [ i , j ].       455
14.25   Bounds-checking transformation: (a) the original loop, and (b) the transformed
        code. 457
14.26   Place of loop optimizations (in bold type) in an aggressive optimizing compiler.      458
14.27   Example of a lir loop for which address scaling, address modification, and operation-
        test-and-branch instructions might all be useful. 460
 15.1   Example of a tail call and tail recursion in C.   462
 15.2   Effect of tail-recursion elimination on in sert_n ode( ) shown in the source code.         462
 15.3   (a) lir code corresponding to Figure 15.1, and (b) the result of performing tail-call
        optimization on both calls in in s e r t .node ( ). 463
 15.4   ican code to perform tail-recursion elimination.    464
 15.5   The Unpack routine saxpy( ) and its calling context in sg e f a ( ).    466
 15.6   A fragment of the Unpack routine sg e f a ( ) after integrating saxpy ( ) into it.    467
 15.7   Capture of a caller’s variable in C by a call-by-value parameter that results from simply
        substituting the callee’s text for a call. 469
786           Illu stratio n s


       15.8   Incorrect placement of save and restore code for the register allocated for variable
              c. 473
       15.9   A l ir f lo w g r a p h e x a m p le fo r sh r in k w r a p p in g .          475
      15.10   The example in Figure 15.9 after shrink wrapping.                                   476
      15.11   Place of procedure optimizations (in bold type) in an aggressive optimizing
              compiler. 477
       16.1   (a) A simple example for register allocation by graph coloring; (b) a symbolic register
              assignment for it; and (c) an allocation for it with three registers, assuming that y and w
              are dead on exit from this code. 486
       16.2   Interference graph for code in Figure 16.1(b).                             486
       16.3   Global type definitions and data structures used in register allocation by graph
              coloring. 487
       16.4   Top level of graph-coloring register-allocation algorithm.                                   488
       16.5   An example of webs. The most complex web is shaded.                                        489
       16.6   Interferences among the webs in Figure 16.5.                               490
       16.7   The routine Make_Webs( ) to determine webs for register allocation by graph
              coloring. 490
       16.8   Each SSA-form variable is the head of a du-chain.                                 492
       16.9   i c a n code to convert the m i r form of a procedure to l i r code with symbolic registers in

              place of variables. 493
      16.10   Example flowgraph for which the two definitions of interference produce different
              interference graphs. 495
      16.11   Adjacency matrix for the interference graph in Figure 16.2, where t and f stand for
              tru e and f a l s e , respectively. 496
      16.12   i c a n code to build the adjacency-matrix representation of the interference graph for

              register allocation by graph coloring. 497
      16.13   Initial adjacency lists for the interference graph in Figure 16.2.                                    498
      16.14   ic a n   c o d e to b u ild th e a d ja c e n c y - lis ts r e p r e s e n ta tio n o f th e in te rfe re n c e g r a p h .    499
      16.15   Code to coalesce registers.                  500
      16.16   ic a n   code to compute spill costs for symbolic registers.                              502
      16.17   Example graphs that are (a) 2-colorable and (b) 3-colorable, but not by the degree < R
              rule. 503
      16.18   Code to attempt to jR-color the interference graph.                                 505
      16.19   The routine A d ju st.N eigh b ors ( ) used in pruning the interference graph.                                           506
      16.20   Routine to assign colors to real and symbolic registers.                                  507
        Illustrations                                                                             787

16.21   i c a n routine to modify the instructions in the procedure to have real registers in place

        of symbolic ones. 508
16.22   The example in Figure 16.5 after splitting web wl.        509
16.23   Interferences among the webs in Figure 16.22.       509
16.24   i c a n code to generate spill code using the costs computed b y Com pute_Spill_Costs ( )

        in Figure 16.16. 510
16.25   A small example of register allocation by graph coloring.        512
16.26   The example in Figure 16.25 with symbolic registers substituted for the local
        variables. 512
16.27   The interference graph (a) and adjacency matrix (b) for the example in Figure 16.26,
        where t and f stand for tru e and f a l s e , respectively. 513
16.28   The example in Figure 16.26 after coalescing registers s4 and s i .     513
16.29   The interference graph (a) and adjacency matrix (b) for the example in Figure 16.28
        after coalescing symbolic registers s i and s4, where t and f stand for tru e and f a l s e ,
        respectively. 514
16.30   The adjacency lists for the code in Figure 16.28.    514
16.31   The interference graph that results from pushing r l through r4 onto the stack.       515
16.32   The adjacency lists corresponding to the interference graph in Figure 16.31.        516
16.33   The interference graph that results from pushing r5 onto the stack.       516
16.34   The adjacency lists corresponding to the interference graph in Figure 16.33.        517
16.35   The flowgraph in Figure 16.28 with real registers substituted for symbolic registers.     518
16.36   Another example flowgraph for register allocation by graph coloring.          518
16.37   The interference graph (a) and adjacency matrix (b) for the example in
        Figure 16.36. 519
16.38   The adjacency lists for the code in Figure 16.36.    520
16.39   (a) The interference graph after removing nodes s i , r2, r3, r4, s4, and s9, and pushing
        them onto the stack, (b) then removing node s8 and pushing it onto the stack, and
        (c) after removing node s7 and pushing it onto the stack. 520
16.40   The interference graph (a) after popping the top three nodes from the stack and (b) after
        popping the fourth node. 521
16.41   The flowgraph in Figure 16.36 with spill code included for s5 and s7.         521
16.42   The interference graph for the code in Figure 16.41.       522
16.43   The flowgraph in Figure 16.41 with real registers substituted for the symbolic
        ones. 522
788           Illu stratio n s


      16.44   Rematerialization lattice.                   523

      16.45   Example of code for which Chow and Hennessy’s live ranges are less precise than our
              webs. 524
      16.46   (a) Priority-based graph-coloring interference graph and (b) graph-coloring interference
              graphs for the code in Figure 16.45. 525

      16.47   Place of register allocation (in bold type) in an aggressive optimizing compiler.                                               527
       17.1   (a) A basic block of l i r code, and (b) a better schedule for it, assuming that a goto has
              a delay slot after it and that there is a one-cycle delay between initiating a load and the
              loaded value’s becoming available in the target register. 533

       17.2   Flowchart for the process of filling branch delay slots.                                     536

       17.3   (a) A basic block including a call, and (b) its dependence DAG. Asterisks mark nodes
              corresponding to instructions that can be moved into the delay slot of the call. 538

       17.4   Two equivalent pairs of instructions. Either might provide more latitude in scheduling
              than the other in a particular situation. 538

       17.5   Computing the Delay ( ) function.                            539

       17.6   Instruction scheduling algorithm.                          540

       17.7   An example dependence DAG.                             541

       17.8   (a) A l i r basic block, (b) Hennessy and Gross’s machine-level DAG, and (c) our
              dependence DAG for it. 543
       17.9   Two greedy schedules for a superscalar processor, one of which (a) is optimal and the
              other of which (b) is not. 544

      17.10   (a) A basic block of l i r code with a register assignment that constrains scheduling
              unnecessarily, and (b) a better register assignment for it. 545

      17.11   Dependence DAGs for the basic blocks in Figure 17.10.                                           546

      17.12   A scheduling of the basic block in Figure 17.10(b) that covers all the load delays.                                                  546

      17.13   ( a ) p o w e r l o o p w it h a o n e - c y c le u n c o v e r e d c m p - b c d e l a y , a n d (b ) t r a n s f o r m e d c o d e t h a t
              c o v e r s it .   547
      17.14   (a) A m i r routine that searches a list, and (b) the same routine with the fetching of the
              next element boosted to occur before testing whether the current element is the end of
              the list. 548
      17.15   A s i m p l e S p a r c l o o p w it h a s s u m e d i s s u e a n d r e s u l t l a t e n c i e s .   549

      17.16   Pipeline diagram for the loop body in Figure 17.15.                                      549

      17.17   The result of software pipelining the loop in Figure 17.15, with issue and result
              latencies. 550

      17.18   Pipeline diagram for the loop body in Figure 17.17.                                      550
        Illustrations                                                                            789

17.19   (a) Dependence DAG for a sample loop body, and (b) double version of it used in
        window scheduling, with dashed lines showing a possible window. 551
17.20   Algorithm for window scheduling.         552
17.21   Double DAGs for successive versions of the loop in Figures 17.15 and 17.22 during the
        window-scheduling process. 554
17.22   Intermediate versions of the loop in Figure 17.15.      554
17.23   Another example loop for software pipelining.         555
17.24   Dependence DAG for the body of the loop in Figure 17.23.         555
17.25   A possible unconstrained schedule of the iterations of the loop in Figure 17.23. The
        boxed parts represent the prologue, body, and epilogue of the software-pipelined
        loop. 556
17.26   (a) Resulting instruction sequence for the pipelined loop, and (b) the result of doing
        register renaming (Section 17.4.5) and fixing the addresses in load instructions so that
        they will execute correctly. 557
17.27   Algorithm to find a repeating unit from which to construct a software pipelining.        558
17.28   (a) A Pascal loop, and (b) the result of unrolling it by a factor of two.   559
17.29   (a) A more general Fortran 77 loop, and (b) the result of unrolling it by a factor of w.
        The notation body/i/j means body with i substituted for /. 560
17.30   i c a n code to implement loop unrolling for a specific pattern of loop control.   561
17.31   (a) A hir loop with examples of accumulator (acc), induction (i), and search (max and
        imax) variables; and (b) the loop after unrolling by a factor of two and expanding the
        accumulator, induction, and search variables. 563
17.32   (a) An example of l i r code to which register renaming may be applied, (b ) the result
        of performing it, and (c) an alternate schedule of the instructions made possible by the
        renaming. 564
17.33   ic a n   code to rename registers in a basic block.   566
17.34   An example of an extended basic block for register renaming.       567
17.35   (a) A s p a r c loop containing a conditional, and (b) the result of window scheduling
        it and moving the two Id instructions marked with asterisks into both arms of the
        conditional. 568
17.36   An example for trace scheduling.       570
17.37   (a) Example m i r code for the trace in Figure 17.36 made up of B1 and B3 (along with
        code for B2), and (b) the result of a scheduling operation and compensation code. 570
17.38   An example of write-live dependence, namely, v <$w' u, because of variable n.      571
17.39   A simple algorithm for percolation scheduling.        572
17.40   Order of optimizations with scheduling phases in bold type.      574
790           Illustrations


       18.1   Algorithm to eliminate unreachable code.                           581
       18.2   Our example (a) before and (b) after unreachable-code elimination.                                    582
       18.3   (a) An example for straightening, and (b) the result of applying the transformation.                              583
       18.4   m ir     code versions of the example code in Figure 18.3.                               583
       18.5   ic a n   c o d e to p e r fo r m str a ig h te n in g o f b a sic -b lo c k p a ir s .    584
       18.6   The routine Fuse_Blocks( ) used by S tra ig h te n ( ).                                  584
       18.7   (a) An example with a condition that is a common subexpression, and (b) the result of
              removing the dead arm of the i f . 586
       18.8   (a) An example of a loop that can be turned into (b) straight-line code and (c) executed
              at compile time. 587
       18.9   An example of loop inversion in C.                        588
      18.10   Nested loops with identical bounds in a Fortran 77 example.                                     588
      18.11   Inverting a C loop that we cannot determine to be entered.                                     588
      18.12   (a) Fortran 77 code with a loop-invariant predicate nested in a loop, and (b) the result
              of unswitching it. 589
      18.13   Unswitching a conditional without an e ls e part.                              589
      18.14   (a) A l i r code example for tail merging, and (b) the result of transforming it.                           591
      18.15   Code to compute the maximum of a and b (a) with branches and (b) with conditional
              moves. 591
      18.16   (a) Example code pattern for which branches may be replaced by conditional moves,
              and (b) the result of the replacement. 592
      18.17   (a) Another example code pattern for which branches may be replaced by conditional
              moves, and (b) the result of the replacement. 592
      18.18   Variable i contributes only to defining itself and thus is inessential.                               593
      18.19   ic a n   routine to detect and remove dead code.                          594
      18.20   An example for dead-code elimination.                           595
      18.21   (a) The Mark table after identifying dead code and (b) the flowgraph in Figure 18.20
              after dead-code elimination. 597
      18.22   (a) Example of code for a superscalar processor for which instruction combining can
              decrease performance, as shown in (b). 601
      18.23   Order of optimizations with control-flow and low-level optimizations in bold type.                                603
       19.1   A program skeleton.                610
       19.2   Call graph for the program skeleton in Figure 19.1.                                610
       19.3   Constructing the call graph.                   611
        Illustrations                                                                                   791

 19.4   Partial call graphs resulting from separate compilation of parts of Figure 19.1.           611
 19.5   Constructing the call graph with procedure-valued variables.             612
 19.6   The procedure P ro ce ss_ In st ( ) used in constructing the call graph with procedure­
        valued variables. 613
 19.7   The procedure Process_Call( ) used in constructing the call graph with procedure­
        valued variables. 614
 19.8   An example program skeleton with procedure-valued variables.                 617
 19.9   Call graph of the program skeleton with procedure-valued variables shown in
        Figure 19.8. 618
19.10   An example program used throughout this section.           621
19.11   (a) Static nesting structure and (b) call graph of the program in Figure 19.10.           622
19.12   ic a n   algorithm to compute IM O D () for a program P.         623
19.13   Algorithm to construct the binding graph B for a program P.              625
19.14   Binding graph for the program in Figure 19.10.          626
19.15   Algorithm to compute R B M O D () on the binding graph B.              626
19.16   ic a n   algorithm to compute IM O D + ( ).   628
19.17   Algorithm to compute nesting levels Level ( ) in a call graph and the subgraphs
        (consisting of nodes N[ ] , roots R[ ], and edges E[ ]) that exclude routines that call
        others at lower nesting levels. S t r a t i f y ( ) uses S et .L e v e ls to compute the nesting
        level of each procedure. 629
19.18   Algorithm for computing GMOD( ) efficiently from IM OD+ ( ) by using a version of
        Tarjan’s algorithm. 630
19.19   An example program for flow-sensitive side-effect computation.                635
19.20   Program summary graph for the program in Figure 19.19.                 636
19.21   Site-independent interprocedural constant-propagation algorithm.               638
19.22   Integer constant-propagation lattice ICP.       639

19.23   An example for interprocedural constant propagation.             640
19.24   An example of interprocedural aliasing.        642
19.25   An example program for interprocedural alias computation.               644
19.26   Algorithm to construct the binding graph B for a program P.              645
19.27   The (a) call and (b) binding graphs for the program in Figure 19.25.                646
19.28   Algorithm for efficiently computing aliases of nonlocal variables using the binding
        graph B. 647
792           Illustrations


      19.29   Algorithm to invert the nonlocal alias function, thus computing the set of formal
              parameters aliased to each nonlocal variable. 648
      19.30   Algorithm to build a program’s pair binding graph n .       649
      19.31   Schema for adding arcs that satisfy p a ir .match ( ) to the pair binding graph. Given
              that procedure p has extended formal parameters u and v, procedure q nested inside p
              has at call site <g,s> a call to procedure r that passes u to formal parameter x of r and w
              to y, and v e A(w), we put the edge <w, */>-><*, y> into the pair binding graph n. 650
      19.32   Pair binding graph n for our example program. The nodes and edges are produced by
              Build_Pair_Graph( ). The shaded nodes are marked by M ark_A lias_Pairs( ). No
              additional nodes are marked by Prop_Marks( ). 651
      19.33   Algorithm to mark parameter pairs in a program’s pair binding graph.          652
      19.34   Algorithm to propagate marking of parameter pairs in a program’s pair binding
              graph. 652
      19.35   Algorithm to compute formal-parameter alias information from Mark( ), A( ), and
              ALIAS ( ). 653
      19.36   Algorithm to combine aliasing information with alias-free side-effect information.     654
      19.37   Call site, entry, and return of a C routine.   655
      19.38   An example C program for interprocedural alias analysis.          655
      19.39   The Linpack routine saxpy( ) and its calling context in sg e f a ( ) after determining that
              incx = incy = 1 and propagating that information into the body of saxpy( ). 657
      19.40   An example call graph for interprocedural register allocation.          659
      19.41   (a) Example l i r code sequence and associated annotations, and (b) the result of
              allocating x and y to registers. 660
      19.42   Annotated l i r code for the C statement x = y = a++ - b.     660
      19.43   Order of optimizations, with interprocedural optimizations shown in bold type.       665
      19.44   Example program on which to run site-specific interprocedural constant
              propagation. 668
      20.1    Four versions of matrix multiplication in Fortran: (a) MM, the usual form; (b) MMT,
              with A transposed; (c) MMB, with the j and k loops tiled; and (d) MMBT, with both
              transposing and tiling. 671
      20.2    Procedure-sorting algorithm.     674
      20.3    Node-coalescing procedure used in Figure 20.2.        675
      20.4    Auxiliary procedures used in the procedure-sorting algorithm.           676
       20.5   (a) An example flowgraph for procedure sorting, and (b) through (d) the first three
              transformations of the flowgraph. 677
      20.6    Bottom-up basic-block positioning algorithm.         679
        Illustrations                                                                                                                         793

 20.7   An example flowgraph for intraprocedural code positioning.                                          681
 20.8   The example flowgraph in Figure 20.7 after intraprocedural code positioning.                                                    681

 20.9   (a) A group of procedure bodies, each split into primary (p) and secondary (s)
        components, and (b) the result of collecting each type of component. 682
20.10   Fortran matrix multiply from Figure 20.1(a) with a scalar temporary in place of
        C(i,j).         683
20.11   (a) A simple h i r recurrence, and (b) the result of using scalar temporaries in it.                                             683
20.12   (a) A doubly nested hir loop, and (b) the result of interchanging the loops.                                               684
20.13   (a) A pair of h i r loops, and (b) the result of fusing them.                                 685
20.14   (a) A C loop with a control-flow construct in its body, and (b) the result of applying
        scalar replacement to a [ ] . 685
20.15   (a ) A d o u b l y n e s t e d   h ir   l o o p , a n d (b ) t h e l o o p w it h s c a l a r r e p l a c e m e n t p e r f o r m e d o n
        x [ i ] in t h e in n e r l o o p .     686

20.16   The loop in Figure 20.15(b) with the inner loop unrolled by a factor of three.                                                 686
20.17   The loop in Figure 20.16 with y [ j] scalar replaced in the inner loop.                                           687
20.18   h i r loops that sum the same sequence of floating-point values but that produce different

        results. The loops in (a) and (b) produce the result 0 .0 , while the one in (c) produces
        1 .0 and the one in (d) produces n. 689
20.19   The assignment in this hir loop nest has the distance vector (1 ,0 ).                                         691
20.20   The code in Figure 20.19 with the loops interchanged.                                     691
20.21   (a) A hir loop nest, and (b) the result of skewing the inner loop.                                        692
20.22   Transformation of (a) the iteration-space traversal of the loop nest shown in
        Figure 20.21(a) by skewing (b). 692
20.23   (a) A pair of hir loops, and (b) the result of fusing them.                                   693
20.24   Two pairs of hir loops, (a) and (b), and the results of fusing them in (c) and (d),
        respectively. In the fused loop (c), there is one dependence, S2 (1) S I, while in loop (d),
        the dependence is SI (1) S2, so loop fusion is legal for the example in (a) but not for the
        one in (b). 693
20.25   (a) A hir loop, and (b) the result of tiling it with a tile size of 2.                                   694
20.26   The result of tiling both loops in the hir loop nest shown in Figure 20.21(a) with a tile
        size of 2. 695
20.27   Iteration-space traversal of the tiled loop nest in Figure 20.26, with n = 6.                                            695
20.28   (a) Fortran matrix multiplication from Figure 20.1(a) with a tile loop for each index,
        and (b) the result of tiling all the loops. 697
20.29   A hir example for which tiling may benefit at most one of the two loops.                                                 697
794           Illu stra tio n s


      20.30   Order of optimizations, with optimizations for the memory hierarchy shown in bold
              type. 702

       21.1   A C procedure that is used as an example in this chapter.    706

       21.2   A Fortran 77 program that is used as an example in this chapter.     706

       21.3   Sun s p a r c compiler structure.    709

       21.4   Sun IR code for lines 9 through 17 in the Fortran 77 routine in Figure 21.2.     709

       21.5   asm+ code corresponding to lines 9 through 12 of the Fortran 77 program in
              Figure 21.2. 712

       21.6   s p a r c assembly code corresponding to the machine code produced by the Sun C

              compiler with 04 optimization for the program in Figure 21.1. 714

       21.7         assembly code corresponding to the machine code produced by the Sun Fortran
              spa r c

              77 compiler with 04 optimization for the main program in Figure 21.2. 715

       21.8   IBM X L compiler structure.         718

       21.9   Structure of the XIL for a procedure.        720

      21.10   X IL code for lines 1 through 10 of the C program in Figure 21.1.     721

      21.11   An example of coalescing condition-code setting with an arithmetic operation in p o w e r .
              The c i in (a) has been absorbed into the s . in (b) by setting its record bit. 723

      21.12   p o w e r assembly code produced by the X L disassembler from the object code

              resulting from compiling the program in Figure 21.1 with the X L C compiler with 03
              optimization. 724

      21.13   p o w e r assembly code produced by the X L disassembler from the object code resulting

              from compiling the routine s l ( ) in Figure 21.2 with the X L Fortran compiler with 03
              optimization. 724

      21.14   DEC Alpha compiler structure.         727

      21.15   (a) Exam ple of CIL code for the C statement a = x [ i ] , and (b) its expansion to EIL
              code. 728

      21.16   Alpha assembly language produced by the GEM C compiler with 05 optimization for
              the routine in Figure 21.1. 731

      21.17   Alpha assembly language produced by the GEM Fortran 77 compiler with 05
              optimization for the routine s l ( ) in Figure 21.2. 732

      21.18   Intel reference compiler structure.        735

      21.19   The IL-1 form of the main routine in Figure 21.2 as produced by the Fortran front
              end. 737

      21.20   The IL-2 form of the inner loop in the main routine in Figure 21.2 as presented to the
              code generator. 737
         Illustrations                                                                         795


21.21    The PIL form of the inner loop in the main routine in Figure 21.2 immediately after
         translation to PIL from the IL-2 form in Figure 21.20. 739

21.22    Pentium assembly code for the C program in Figure 21.1 as produced by the Intel
         reference compiler. 741

21.23    Pentium assembly code for the routine s l ( ) in the Fortran 77 program in Figure 21.2
         as produced by the Intel reference compiler. 742

21.24    Pentium assembly code for the main routine in the Fortran 77 program in Figure 21.2
         as produced by the Intel reference compiler. 743

  B .l   Representation of the three-member, strictly increasing sequence 3, 7, 15 by (a) a two-
         way linked list, and (b) by a doubleword bit vector (the bits are numbered from the
         right). 758

  B.2    ic a n   code to compute set union for the linked-list representation.   760

  B.3    (a) A balanced binary tree of identifiers; (b) the result of adding day, making the tree
         unbalanced; and (c) the result of rebalancing the tree. 761

  B.4    Sparse representation of the set {2, 5, 7, 4} with u = 8.    762

  B.5    Representation of the set {5, 2, 11, 23, 94, 17} by a two-way linked-segment list.   763

  B.6    (a) Linked representation of a binary tree, namely, an expression tree that represents
         (2 + x) - 3; (b) the meanings of its fields. 764

  B.7    DAG representation of structural data-flow equations.        765
                                                                                                    Tables




 1.1    Sizes o f data types.          17

 2.1    O perators used in Extended Backus-N aur Form syntax descriptions.                     20

 2.2    Syntax o f whole i c a n program s.                 25

 2.3    Syntax o f i c a n type definitions.               26

 2.4    Syntax of i c a n declarations.              26

 2.5    Syntax o f i c a n expressions.             27

 2.6    Syntax o f i c a n constants o f generic simple types.                       28

 2.7    Syntax o f i c a n statem ents.             37

 2.8    The keywords in i c a n .            40

 3.1    Typical fields in sym bol-table entries.                  46

 4.1    xbn f   s y n t a x o f m ir p r o g r a m s a n d p r o g r a m u n its .   74

 4.2    xbn f   s y n ta x o f m ir in s tru c tio n s .    74

 4.3    Unary operators in m i r .             75

 4.4    Changes to x b n f description o f instructions and operands to turn m i r into h i r .        79

 4.5    Changes in the x b n f description o f m i r instructions and expressions to create l i r .         80

 4.6    N am es o f m i r , h i r , and l i r operators as members o f the i c a n enumerated type
        IROper. 82
 4.7    m ir   instructions represented as i c a n tuples.                   83

 4.8    Representation o f h i r instructions that are not in m i r in i c a n .          87

 4.9    Representation of l i r instructions in i c a n .                  89

4.1 0   Representation o f memory addresses (denoted by t r a n (M em A dd r) in Table 4.9).            91

 8.1    Correspondence between bit-vector positions, definitions, and basic blocks for the
        flowchart in Figure 7.3. 2 2 0

                                                                                                        797
798           Tables


        8.2   Flow functions for the flowgraph in Figure 7.4.          233
        8.3   in () values computed by structural analysis for our reaching definitions example.               244
        8.4   in () values computed by interval analysis for our reaching definitions example.                250
        8.5   Inductive assertions associated with the exit from each block in Figure 8.27 that are
              needed to determine that it computes the integer factorial function. 263
        9.1   Access-path matrix for the point just preceding the return in Figure 9.22. The value at
              the intersection of row Ja.varl and column varl represents the path from the original
              value of varl to the current value of varl. A   entry means there is no such path. 288
       14.1   Assignment types that may generate dependent induction variables.               429
       18.1   The basic-block data structures for the flowgraph in Figure 18.2.             582
       19.1   Values of Nonlocals( ) and IMOD( ) for the program in Figure 19.10.                 624
       19.2   Initial values of RBMOD( ) obtained by evaluating the existentially quantified
              expression in the equations for RBMOD( ) for the nodes in the binding graph for our
              example in Figure 19.10. 627
       19.3   Final values of RBMOD( ) for the nodes in the binding graph for our example in
              Figure 19.10. 627
       19.4   Values of RM OD( ) for our example in Figure 19.10.             628
       19.5   Values of IM O D + ( ) for our example in Figure 19.10.          629
       19.6   Values of Level ( ), N [ ] , R[ ], and E[ ] for our example program in Figure 19.10.              632
       19.7   Initial values for GM O D( ) for our example program.            632
       19.8   Final values for GM O D ( ) for our example program.            633
       19.9   Values of DM O D( ) for our example program.             633
      19.10   Possible jump functions and their support sets for the example program in
              Figure 19.23. 640
      19.11   (a) The A( ) sets computed by N o n l o c a l _ A l i a s e s ( ) and (b) the ALIAS( )
              sets computed by I n v e r t _ N o n l o c a l _ A l i a s e s ( ) for our example program in
              Figure 19.25. 648
      19.12   Alias sets for formal parameters computed by F o rm al.A liases ( ) for our example
              program in Figure 19.25. 653
       21.1   Comparison of the four compiler suites on the C example program.                 744
       21.2   Comparison of the four compiler suites on the Fortran example program.                    745
       A .l   sparc register operand forms.         748
       A.2    sparc opcodes used in the text.        748
       A.3    sparc pseudo-operations.        749
        Tables                                                    799

 A.4    power and PowerPC opcodes used in the text.         750

 A.5    Alpha integer register names.     751

 A.6    Alpha opcodes used in the text.     751

 A. 7   Intel 386 architecture integer register names.     752

 A.8    Intel 386 architecture opcodes used in the text.    753

 A.9    pa-risc register names.   754

A.10    pa-risc opcodes.   754
                                                                             Bibliography




  [Ada83] The Programming Language Ada Reference Manual, ANSI/MIL-STD-1815A-1983, U.S.
          Dept, of Defense, Washington, DC, 1983.
 [AdlG93] Adl-Tabatabai, Ali-Reza and Thomas Gross. Detection and Recovery of Endangered Variables
          Caused by Instruction Scheduling, in [PLDI93], pp. 13-25.
 [AhaL93] Ahalt, Stanley C. and James F. Leathrum. Code-Generation Methodology Using Tree-Parsers
          and High-Level Intermediate Representations, J. o f Programming Languages, Vol. 1, No. 2,
          1993, pp. 103-126.
[AhoC75] Aho, Alfred V. and M.J. Corasick. Efficient String Matching: An Aid to Bibliographic Search,
         CACM, Vol. 18, No. 6, June 1975, pp. 333-340.
[AhoG89] Aho, Alfred V., Mahadevan Ganapathi, and Steven W.K. Tjiang. Code Generation Using Tree
         Pattern Matching and Dynamic Programming, ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 11, No. 4, Oct. 1989,
         pp. 491-516.
[AhoH74] Aho, Alfred V., John Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. The Design and Analysis o f Computer
         Algorithms, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1974.
 [AhoJ76] Aho, Alfred V. and Steven C. Johnson. Optimal Code Generation for Expression Trees,/ACM,
          Vol. 23, No. 3, July 1976, pp. 488-501.
 [AhoS86] Aho, Alfred V., Ravi Sethi, and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and
          Tools, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1986.
 [AigG84] Aigran, Philippe, Susan L. Graham, Robert R. Henry, M. Kirk McKusick, and Eduardo
          Pelegri-Llopart. Experience with a Graham-Glanville Style Code Generator, in [Comp84],
          pp. 13-24.
  [Aike88] Aiken, Alexander. Compaction-Based Parallelization, Ph.D. thesis, Tech. Rept. TR-88-922,
           Dept, of Comp. Sci., Cornell Univ., Ithaca, NY, June 1988.
[AikN88a] Aiken, Alexander and Alexandru Nicolau. Optimal Loop Parallelization, in [PLDI88],
          pp. 308-317.
[AikN88b] Aiken, Alexander and Alexandru Nicolau. Perfect Pipelining: A New Loop Parallelization
          Technique, Proc. o f the 1988 Euro. Symp. on Programming, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988,
          pp. 308-317.
 [AikN91] Aiken, Alexander and Alexandru Nicolau. A Realistic Resource-Constrained Software
          Pipelining Algorithm, in Nicolau, Alexandru, David Gelernter, Thomas Gross, and

                                                                                                801
802              Bibliography


                 David Padua (eds.).Advances in Languages and Compilers for Parallel Processing, MIT Press,
                 Cambridge, MA, 1991.
      [AllC72a] Allen, Frances E. and John Cocke. A Catalogue of Optimizing Transformations, in Rustin,
                Randall (ed.).  Design and Optimization of Compilers,
                                                                   Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
                1972, pp. 1-30.
      [AllC72b] Allen, Frances E. and John Cocke. Graph Theoretic Constructs for Program Control Flow
                Analysis, Research Rept. RC3923, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Ctr., Yorktown Heights,
                NY, 1972.
       [A11C76] Allen, Frances E. and John Cocke. A Program Data Flow Analysis Procedure, CACM, Vol.
                19, No. 3, Mar. 1976, pp. 137-147.
       [A11C811 Allen, Frances E., John Cocke, and Ken Kennedy. Reduction of Operator Strength, in
                [MucJ81], pp. 79-101.
       [A11C86] Allen, J. Randy, David Callahan, and Ken Kennedy. An Implementation of Interprocedural
                Data Flow Analysis in a Vectorizing Fortran Compiler, Tech. Rept. COMP TR-86-38, Dept,
                of Comp. Sci., Rice Univ., Houston, TX, May 1986.
       [Alle69] Allen, Frances E. Program Optimization, in Halprin, Mark I. and Christopher J. Shaw (eds.).
                 Annual Review of Automatic Programming,     Vol. 5, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, 1969,
                pp. 239-307.
      [Alph92]   Alpha Architecture Handbook, Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, MA, 1992.
      [AlpW88] Alpern, Bowen, Mark N. Wegman, and F. Kenneth Zadeck. Detecting Equality of Variables
               in Programs, in [POPL88], pp. 1-11.
       [AlsL96] Alstrup, Stephen and Peter W. Lauridsen. A Simple Dynamic Algorithm for Maintaining a
                Dominator Tree, Tech. Rept. 96/3, Dept, of Comp. Sci., Univ. of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
                1996.
      [AndS92] Andrews, Kristy and Duane Sand. Migrating a cisc Computer Family onto R is e via Object
               Code Translation, in [ASPL92], pp. 213-222.
      [ANSI89]   American National Standard X3.159-1989, The C Programming Language, ANSI, New
                 York, NY, 1989.
      [ASPL82] Proc. of the Symp. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
               Systems, Palo Alto, CA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 17, No. 4, Apr. 1982.
      [ASPL87] Proc. of the 2nd Inti. Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
               Operating Systems, Palo Alto, CA, IEEE Comp. Soc. Order No. 805, Oct. 1987.
      [ASPL89] Proc. of the 3rd Inti. Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Op­
               erating Systems, Boston, MA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 24, special issue, May
                 1989.
      [ASPL91] Proc. of the 4th Inti. Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Oper­
               ating Systems, Santa Clara, CA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 26, No. 4, Apr. 1991.
      [ASPL92] Proc. of the Fifth Inti. Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
               Operating Systems, Boston, MA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 27, No. 9, Sept. 1992.
      [AusH82] Auslander, Marc and Martin Hopkins. An Overview of the PL.8 Compiler, in [Comp82], pp.
               22-31.
          Bibliography                                                                           803


[BalL92] Ball, Thomas and James R. Larus. Optimally Profiling and Tracing Programs, in [POPL92],
         pp. 59-70.
[BalL93] Ball, Thomas and James R. Larus. Branch Prediction for Free, in [PLDI93], pp. 300-313.
[Bane76] Banerjee, Utpal. Dependence Testing in Ordinary Programs, M.S. thesis, Dept, of Comp. Sci.,
         Univ. of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL, Nov. 1976.
[Bane8 8 | Banerjee, Utpal. Dependence Analysis for Supercomputingy Kluwer Academic Publishers,
           Boston, MA, 1988.
[Bane93] Banerjee, Utpal. Loop Transformations for Restructuring Compilers, Kluwer Academic Pub­
         lishers, Boston, MA, 1993.
[Bane94] Banerjee, Utpal. Loop Parallelization, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA, 1993.
[Bann79] Banning, John P. An Efficient Way to Find the Side Effects of Procedure Calls and the Aliases
         of Variables, in [POPL79], pp. 29-41.
 [Bart78] Barth, John M. A Practical Interprocedural Data Flow Analysis Algorithm, CACM, Vol. 21,
          No. 9, Nov. 1978, pp. 724-736.
 [Bell90] Bell, Ron. IBM RISC System/6000 Performance Tuning for Numerically Intensive Fortran
          and C Programs, Document No. GG24-3611, IBM Inti. Tech. Support Ctr., Poughkeepsie,
          NY, Aug. 1990.
[BerC92] Bernstein, David, Doron Cohen, Yuval Lavon, and Vladimir Rainish. Performance Evaluation
         of Instruction Scheduling on the IBM RISC System/6000, Proc. o f MICRO-25, Portland, OR,
         published as SIG MICRO Newsletter; Vol. 23, Nos. 1 and 2, Dec. 1992.
[BerG89] Bernstein, David, Dina Q. Goldin, Martin C. Golumbic, Hugo Krawczyk, Yishay Mansour,
         Itai Nahshon, and Ron Y. Pinter. Spill Code Minimization Techniques for Optimizing Com­
         pilers, in [PLDI89], pp. 258-263.
[BerG95] Bergin, Thomas J. and Richard G. Gibson (eds.). The History o f Programming Languages-II,
         ACM Press, New York, NY, 1995.
[BerK87] Bergh, A., Keith Keilman, Daniel Magenheimer, and James A. Miller. HP 3000 Emulation on
         HP Precision Architecture Computers, Hewlett-Packard J., Dec. 1987.
[BerR91] Bernstein, David and M. Rodeh. Global Instruction Scheduling for Superscalar Machines, in
         [PLDI91], pp. 241-255.
 [Bird82] Bird, Peter. An Implementation of a Code Generator Specification Language for Table Driven
          Code Generators, in [Comp821, pp. 44-55.
 [BliC92] Blickstein, David S., Peter W. Craig, Caroline S. Davidson, R. Neil Faiman, Jr., Kent D.
          Glossop, Richard B. Grove, Steven O. Hobbs, and William B. Noyce. The GEM Optimizing
          Compiler System, Digital Tech. J., Vol. 4, No. 4, special issue, 1992.
[BodC90] Bodin, Francois and Francois Charot. Loop Optimization for Horizontal Microcoded M a­
         chines, Proc. o f the 1990 Inti Conf. on Supercomputing, Amsterdam, June 1990, pp. 164-
         176.
[Brad91] David G. Bradlee. Retargetable Instruction Scheduling for Pipelined Processors, Ph.D. thesis,
         Tech. Rept. UW-CSE-91-08-07, Dept, of Comp. Sci. and Engg., Univ. of Washington, Seattle,
         WA, June 1991.
804              B ib lio g rap h y


       [BraE91] Bradlee, David G., Susan J. Eggers, and Robert R. Henry. Integrated Register Allocation and
                Instruction Scheduling for RISCs, in [ASPL91], pp. 122-131.
      [BraH91] Bradlee, David G., Robert R. Henry, and Susan J. Eggers. The Marion System for Retar-
               getable Instruction Scheduling, in [PLDI91], pp. 229-240.
       [BriC89] Briggs, Preston, Keith D. Cooper, Ken Kennedy, and Linda Torczon. Coloring Heuristics for
                Register Allocation, in [PLDI89], pp. 275-284.
      [BriC94a] Briggs, Preston, Keith D. Cooper, and Linda Torczon. Improvements to Graph Coloring
                Register Allocation, ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 16, No. 3, May 1994, pp. 428-455.
      [BriC94b] Briggs, Preston and Keith D. Cooper. Effective Partial Redundancy Elimination, in [PLDI94],
                pp. 159-170.
      [BriC94c] Briggs, Preston, Keith D. Cooper, and Taylor Simpson. Value Numbering, Tech. Rept. CRPC-
                TR94517-S, Ctr. for Research on Parallel Computation, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, Nov. 1994.
        [Brig92] Briggs, Preston. Register Allocation via Graph Coloring, Tech. Rept. CRPC-TR92218, Ctr.
                 for Research on Parallel Computation, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, Apr. 1992.
       [BriT93] Briggs, Preston and Linda Torczon. An Efficient Representation for Sparse Sets, ACM LO-
                PLAS, Vol. 2, Nos. 1-4, Mar.-Dec. 1993, pp. 59-69.
       [CalC 8 6 ] Callahan, David, Keith D. Cooper, Ken Kennedy, and Linda Torczon. Interprocedural Con­
                   stant Propagation, in [Comp 8 6 ], pp. 152-161.
       [CalC90] Callahan, David, Steve Carr, and Ken Kennedy. Improving Register Allocation for Subscripted
                Variables, in [PLDI90], pp. 53-65.
       [CalG95] Calder, Brad, Dirk Grunwald, Donald Lindsay, James Martin, Michael Mozer, and Benjamin
                G. Zorn. Corpus-Based Static Branch Prediction, in [PLDI95], pp. 79-92.
       [CalK91] Callahan, David and Brian Koblenz. Register Allocation by Hierarchical Tiling, in [PLDI91],
                pp. 192-203.
        [Call8 6 ] Callahan, David. Dependence Testing in PFC: Weak Separability, Dept, of Comp. Sci., Rice
                   Univ., Houston, TX , Aug. 1986.
        [Call8 8 ] Callahan, David. The Program Summary Graph and Flow-Sensitive Interprocedural Data
                   Flow Analysis, in [PLDI8 8 ], pp. 47-56.
      [CamK93] Campbell, Philip L., Ksheerabdhi Krishna, and Robert A. Ballance. Refining and Defining the
               Program Dependence Web, Tech. Rept. CS93-6, Univ. of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM,
               Mar. 1993.
       [Catt79] Cattell, Roderic G.G. Code Generation and Machine Descriptions, Tech. Rept. CSL-79-8,
                Xerox Palo Alto Research Ctr., Palo Alto, CA, Oct. 1979.
      [CF7790] CF77 Compiling System, Volume 1: Fortran Reference Manual, Publication SR-3071 4.0,
               Cray Research, Inc., Mendota Heights, MN, 1990.
      [ChaA81] Chaitin, Gregory, Marc Auslander, Ashok Chandra, John Cocke, Martin Hopkins, and Peter
               Markstein. Register Allocation Via Coloring, Computer Languages, Vol. 6 , No. 1, 1981, pp.
               47-57; also in [Stal90], pp. 88-97.
       [Chai82] Chaitin, Gregory. Register Allocation and Spilling via Graph Coloring, in [Comp82], pp. 98-
                105.
           Bibliography                                                                         805


[ChaW90] Chase, David R., Mark Wegman, and F. Kenneth Zadeck. Analysis of Pointers and Structures,
         in [PLDI90], pp. 296-310.
[CheM92] Chernoff, Anton and Maurice P. Marks. Personal communication, Digital Equipment Corp.,
         Nashua, NH, Mar. 1992.
 [Cher92] Chernoff, Anton. Personal communication, Digital Equipment Corp., Nashua, NH, May
          1992.
 [ChiD89] Chi, Chi-Hung and Hank Dietz. Unified Management of Registers and Cache Using Liveness
          and Cache Bypass, in [PLDI89], pp. 344-355.
[ChoH84] Chow, Frederick and John Hennessy. Register Allocation by Priority-Based Coloring, in
         [Comp84], pp. 222-232; also in [Stal90], pp. 98-108.
[ChoH90] Chow, Frederick and John Hennessy. The Priority-Based Coloring Approach to Register
         Allocation, ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 501-536.
[Chow83] Chow, Frederick. A Portable Machine-Independent Global Optimizer—Design and Mea­
         surements, Tech. Rept. 83-254, Comp. Systems Lab., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, Dec.
         1983.
[Chow 8 6 ] Chow, Paul, m ips -x Instruction Set and Programmer’s Manual, Tech. Rept. No. CSL-86-289,
            Comp. Systems Lab., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, May 1986.
[Chow8 8 ] Chow, Frederick. Minimizing Register Usage Penalty at Procedure Calls, in [PLDI8 8 ], pp.
           85-94.
[ChoW92] Chow, Frederick and Alexand Wu. Personal communication, mips Computer Systems, Inc.,
         Mountain View, CA, May 1992.
[ChrH84] Christopher, Thomas W., Philip J. Hatcher, and Ronald C. Kukuk. Using Dynamic Profiling
         to Generate Optimized Code in a Graham-Glanville Style Code Generator, in [Comp84], pp.
         25-36.
 [CliR91] Clinger, William and Jonathan Rees (eds.). Revised4 Report on the Algorithmic Language
          Scheme, Artificial Intelligence Lab., MIT, Cambridge, MA, and Comp. Sci. Dept., Indiana
          Univ., Bloomington, IN, Nov. 1991.
[CloM87] Clocksin, W.F. and C.S. Mellish. Programming in Prolog, third edition, Springer-Verlag,
         Berlin, 1987.
[CmeK91] Cmelik, Robert F., Shing I. Kong, David R. Ditzel, and Edmund J. Kelly. An Analysis of sparc
         and mips Instruction Set Utilization on the spec Benchmarks, in [ASPL91], pp. 290-302.
[CmeK93] Robert F. Cmelik and David Keppel. Shade: A Fast Instruction-Set Simulator for Execution
         Profiling, Tech. Rept. SMLI 93-12, Sun Microsystems Labs, Mountain View, CA, and Tech.
         Rept. UWCSE 93-06-06, Dept, of Comp. Sci. and Engg., Univ. of Washington, Seattle, WA,
         1993.
 [Cmel93] Cmelik, Robert F. SpixTools User’s Manual, Tech. Rept. SMLI TR-93-6, Sun Microsystems
          Labs, Mountain View, CA, Feb. 1993.
 [CocS69] Cocke, John and Jacob T. Schwartz. Programming Languages and Their Compilers: Prelimi­
          nary Notes, Courant Inst, of Math. Sci., New York Univ., New York, NY, 1969.
806              B ib lio g rap h y


       [ColN87] Colwell, Robert P., Robert P. Nix, John J. O ’Donnell, David B. Papworth, and Paul K.
                Rodman. A VLIW Architecture for a Trace Scheduling Compiler, in [ASPL87], pp. 180-192.
      [Comp79] Proc. o f the SIGPLAN 379 Symp. on Compiler C o n s t r Denver, CO, published as SIGPLAN
               Notices, Vol. 14, No. 8 , Aug. 1979.
      [Comp82] Proc. o f the SIGPLAN 382 Symp. on Compiler Constr., Boston, MA, published as SIGPLAN
               Notices, Vol. 17, No. 6 , June 1982.
      [Comp84] Proc. o f the SIGPLAN 384 Symp. on Compiler Constr.y Montreal, Quebec, published as
               SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 19, No. 6 , June 1984.
      [Comp 8 6 ] Proc. o f the SIG PLA N 386 Symp. on Compiler Constr.y Palo Alto, CA, published as SIG­
                  PLAN Noticesy Vol. 21, No. 7, July 1986.
      [CooH92] Cooper, Keith D., Mary W. Hall, and Linda Torczon. Unexpected Effects of Inline Substitu­
               tion: A Case Study, ACM LO PLAS, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 22-32.
      [CooH93] Cooper, Keith D., Mary W. Hall, Robert T. Hood, Ken Kennedy, K.S. McKinley, J.M .
               Mellor-Crummey, Linda Torczon, and S.K. Warren. The ParaScope Parallel Programming
               Environment, Proc. o f the IEEE, Vol. 81, No. 2, 1993, pp. 244-263.
      [CooK84] Cooper, Keith D. and Ken Kennedy. Efficient Computation of Flow Insensitive Interprocedural
               Summary, in [Comp84], pp. 247-258.
      [C 0 0 K 8 6 ] Cooper, Keith D., Ken Kennedy, and Linda Torczon. Interprocedural Optimization: Eliminat­
                     ing Unnecessary Recompilation, in [Comp 8 6 ], pp. 58-67.
  [CooK 8 8 a] Cooper, Keith D. and Ken Kennedy. Efficient Computation of Flow Insensitive Interprocedural
               Summary—A Correction, SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 23, No. 4, Apr. 1988, pp. 35-42.
  [CooK 8 8 b] Cooper, Keith D. and Ken Kennedy. Interprocedural Side-Effect Analysis in Linear Time, in
               [PLDI8 8 ], pp. 57-66.
      [CooK89] Cooper, Keith D. and Ken Kennedy. Fast Interprocedural Alias Analysis, in [POPL89], pp.
               49-59.
      [CooS95a] Cooper, Keith D., Taylor Simpson, and Christopher Vick. Operator Strength Reduction, Tech.
                Rept. CRPC-TR95635-S, Ctr. for Research on Parallel Computation, Rice Univ., Houston,
                TX , Oct. 1995.
      [CooS95b] Cooper, Keith D., and Taylor Simpson. SCC-Based Value Numbering, Tech. Rept. CRPC-
                TR95636-S, Ctr. for Research on Parallel Computation, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, Oct.
                1995.
      [CooS95c] Cooper, Keith D., and Taylor Simpson. Value-Driven Code Motion, Tech. Rept. CRPC-
                TR95637-S, Ctr. for Research on Parallel Computation, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, Oct.
                1995.
      [CouH 8 6 ] Coutant, Deborah, Carol Hammond, and John Kelly. Compilers for the New Generation of
                  Hewlett-Packard Computers, Proc. o f COM PCO N S 386, 1986, pp. 48-61; also in [Stal90],
                  pp. 132-145.
       [Cout8 6 ] Coutant, Deborah. Retargetable High-Level Alias Analysis, in [POPL8 6 ], pp. 110-118.
       [CytF89] Cytron, Ronald, Jean Ferrante, Barry K. Rosen, Mark N. Wegman, and F. Kenneth Zadeck.
                An Efficient Method of Computing Static Single Assignment Form, in [POPL89], pp. 23-25.
           Bibliography                                                                             807


 [CytF91] Cytron, Ronald, Jean Ferrante, Barry K. Rosen, Mark N. Wegman, and F. Kenneth Zadeck.
          Efficiently Computing Static Single Assignment Form and the Program Dependence Graph,
          ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 13, No. 4, Oct. 1991, pp. 451-490.
[DamG94] Damron, Peter C., Vinod Grover, and Shahrokh Mortazavi. Personal communication, Sun
         Microsystems, Inc., Mountain View, CA, May 1994.
[DanE73] Dantzig, George and B.C. Eaves. Fourier-Motzkin Elimination and Its Dual, J. o f Combina­
         torial Theory A, Vol. 14, 1973, pp. 288-297.
 [DeuS84] Deutsch, L. Peter and Allan M. Schiffman. Efficient Implementation of the Smalltalk-80
          System, in [POPL84], pp. 297-302.
 [Deut94] Deutsch, Alain. Interprocedural May-Alias Analysis for Pointers: Beyond ^-Limiting, in
          [PLDI94], pp. 230-241.
[Dham8 8 ] Dhamdhere, Dhananjay M. A Fast Algorithm for Code Movement Optimization, SIGPLAN
           Notices, Vol. 23, No. 10, Oct. 1988, pp. 172-180.
[Dham91] Dhamdhere, Dhananjay M. Practical Adaptation of the Global Optimization Algorithm of
         Morel and Renvoise, ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 13, No. 2, Apr. 1991, pp. 291-294.
[DhaR92] Dhamdhere, Dhananjay M., Barry K. Rosen, and F. Kenneth Zadeck. How to Analyze Large
         Programs Efficiently and Informatively, in [PLDI92], pp. 212-223.
[DonB79] Dongarra, Jack, James Bunch, Cleve Moler, and G. Stewart. LINPACK Users Guide, Society
         for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1979.
 [EbcG94] Ebcioglu, Kemal, Randy Groves, Ki-Chang Kim, Gabriel Silberman, and Isaac Ziv. vliw
          Compilation Techniques in a Superscalar Environment, in [PLDI94], pp. 36-46.
 [EisW92] Eisenbeis, Christine and D. Windheiser. A New Class of Algorithms for Software Pipelining
          with Resource Constraints, Tech. Rept., INRIA, Le Chesnay, France, 1992.
  [E1H85] Ellis, John R. Bulldog: A Compiler for VLIW Architectures, Ph.D. dissertation, Dept, of
          Comp. Sci., Yale Univ., New Haven, CT, 1985.
  [E11S90] Ellis, Margaret A. and Bjarne Stroustrup. The Annotated C++ Reference Manual, Addison-
           Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990.
 [Enge75] Engelfriet, Joost. Tree Automata and Tree Grammars, DAIMI Rept. FN-10, Dept, of Comp.
          Sci., Univ. of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark, Apr. 1975.
 [FarK75] Farrow, Rodney, Ken Kennedy, and Linda Zucconi. Graph Grammars and Global Pro­
          gram Flow Analysis, Proc. o f the 17th IEEE Symp. on Foundations o f Comp. Sci., Houston,
          TX, Nov. 1975.
 [Farn8 8 ] Farnum, Charles. Compiler Support for Floating-Point Computation, Software—Practice and
            Experience, Vol. 18, No. 7, July 1988, pp. 701-709.
 [Feau91] Feautrier, P. Data Flow Analysis of Array and Scalar References, Inti. J. o f Parallel Program­
          ming, Vol. 20, No. 1, Jan. 1991.
 [Fer087] Ferrante, Jeanne, Karl J. Ottenstein, and Joe D. Warren. The Program Dependence Graph and
          Its Use in Optimization, ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 9, No. 3, July 1987, pp. 319-349.
  [Fish81] Fisher, Joseph A. Trace Scheduling: A Technique for Global Microcode Compaction, IEEE
           Trans, on Comps., Vol. C-30, No. 7, July 1981, pp. 478-490.
808              B ib lio g rap h y


        [FisL91] Fischer, Charles N. and Richard J. LeBlanc, Jr. Crafting a Compiler With C, Benjamin-
                 Cummings, Redwood City, CA, 1991.
        [Fort78] Programming Language FORTRAN, ANSI X 3.9-1978 and ISO 1539-1980(E), ANSI, New
                 York, NY, 1978.
        [Fort92] Programming Language Fortran 90, ANSI X 3 .198-1992 and ISO/IEC 1539-1991(E), ANSI,
                 New York, NY, 1992.
      [FraH91a] Fraser, Christopher W., Robert R. Henry, and Todd A. Proebsting. BURG—Fast Optimal
                Instruction Selection and Tree Parsing, SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 27, No. 4, Apr. 1991,
                pp. 68-76.
      [FraH91b] Fraser, Christopher W., David A. Hanson. A Retargetable Compiler for ANSI C, SIGPLAN
                Notices, Vol. 26, No. 10, Oct. 1991, pp. 29-43.
       [FraH92] Fraser, Christopher W., David R. Hanson, and Todd A. Proebsting. Engineering a Simple
                Code-Generator Generator, ACM LOPLAS, Vol. 1, No. 3, Sept. 1992, pp. 213-226.
       [FraH95] Fraser, Christopher W. and David R. Hanson. A Retargetable C Compiler: Design and Imple­
                mentation, Benjamin-Cummings, Redwood City, CA, 1995.
        [Frei74] Freiburghouse, Richard A. Register Allocation via Usage Counts, CACM, Vol. 17, No. 11,
                 Nov. 1974, pp. 638-642.
       [GanF82] Ganapathi, Mahadevan and Charles N. Fischer. Description-Driven Code Generation Using
                Attribute Grammars, in [POPL82], pp. 107-119.
       [GanF84] Ganapathi, Mahadevan and Charles N. Fischer. Attributed Linear Intermediate Representa­
                tions for Code Generation, Software—Practice and Experience, Vol. 14, No. 4, Apr. 1984,
                pp. 347-364.
       [GanF85] Ganapathi, Mahadevan and Charles N. Fischer. Affix Grammar Driven Code Generation,
                ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 7, No. 4, Oct. 1985, pp. 560-599.
      [GanK89] Ganapathi, Mahadevan and Ken Kennedy. Interprocedural Analysis and Optimization, Tech.
               Rept. RICE COMP TR89-96, Dept, of Comp. Sci., Rice Univ., Houston, TX, July 1989.
       [GarJ79J Garey, Michael R. and David S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the
                Theory o f NP-Completeness, W.H. Freeman and Co., San Francisco, CA, 1979.
      [GhoM861 Ghodssi, Vida, Steven S. Muchnick, and Alexand Wu. A Global Optimizer for Sun Fortran,
               C, and Pascal, Proc. o f the Summer 1986 USENIX Conf., Portland, OR, June 1986, pp.
               318-334.
      [GibM 8 6 ] Gibbons, Phillip A. and Steven S. Muchnick. Efficient Instruction Scheduling for a Pipelined
                  Processor, in [Comp 8 6 ], pp. 11-16.
       [GilG83] Gill, John, Thomas Gross, John Hennessy, Norman P. Jouppi, Steven Przybylski, and Christo­
                pher Rowen. Summary of mips Instructions, Tech. Note 83-237, Comp. Systems Lab., Stan­
                ford Univ., Stanford, CA, Nov. 1983.
       [GinL87] Gingell, Robert A., Meng Lee, Xuong T. Dang, and Mary S. Weeks. Shared Libraries in
                SunOS, Proc. o f the 1987 Summer USENIX C onf, Phoenix, AZ, June 1987, pp. 131-146.
       [GlaG78] Glanville, R. Steven and Susan L. Graham. A New Method for Compiler Code Generation,
                in [POPL78], pp. 231-240.
           Bibliography                                                                             809


[GofK91] Goff, Gina, Ken Kennedy, and Chau-Wen Tseng. Practical Dependence Testing, in [PLDI91],
         pp. 15-29.
 [Gold72] Goldstine, Hermann H. The Computer from Pascal to Von Neumann, Princeton Univ. Press,
          Princeton, NJ, 1972.
 [Gold84] Goldberg, Adele. Smalltalk-80: The Interactive Programming Environment, Addison-Wesley,
          Reading, MA, 1984.
 [Gold91] Goldberg, David. What Every Computer Scientist Should Know About Floating-Point Arith­
          metic, ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 23, No. 1, Mar. 1991, pp. 5-48.
[GolR901 Golumbic, M.C. and Victor Rainish. Instruction Scheduling Beyond Basic Blocks, in [IBMJ90],
         pp. 93-97.
[G0 0 H 8 8 ] Goodman, J.R. and W.-C. Hsu. Code Scheduling and Register Allocation in Large Basic
              Blocks, Proc. o f the Inti. Conf. on Super computing, St. Malo, France, July 1988, pp. 442-
              452.
 [GosJ96] Gosling, James, Bill Joy, and Guy Steele. The Java Language Specification, Addison-Wesley,
          Reading, MA, 1996.
[GraH82] Graham, Susan L., Robert R. Henry, and Robert A. Schulman. An Experiment in Table Driven
         Code Generation, in [Comp82], pp. 32-43.
 [GraJ79] Graham, Susan L., William N. Joy, and Olivier Roubine. Hashed Symbol Tables for Lan­
          guages with Explicit Scope Control, in [Comp79], pp. 50-57.
 [GriP6 8 ] Griswold, Ralph E., James F. Poage, and Ivan P. Polonsky. The SN O BO L4 Programming
            Language, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1968.
 [GroF92] Grove, Richard B. and R. Neil Faiman, Jr. Personal communication, Digital Equipment Corp.,
          Littleton, MA, Sept. 1992.
[GroT93] Grove, Dan and Linda Torczon. Interprocedural Constant Propagation: A Study of Jump
         Function Implementation, in [PLDI93], pp. 90-99.
 [Grov94] Grove, Richard B. Personal communication, Digital Equipment Corp., Littleton, MA, May
          1994.
[GupS89] Gupta, Rajiv, Mary Lou Soffa, and Tim Steele. Register Allocation via Clique Separators, in
         [PLDI89], pp. 264-274.
 [Gupt90] Gupta, Rajiv. Compiler Optimization o f Data Storage, Ph.D. dissertation, California Inst, of
          Technology, Pasadena, CA, July 1990.
 [Gupt93] Gupta, Rajiv. Optimizing Array Bounds Checks Using Flow Analysis, ACM LOPLAS, Vol. 2,
          Nos. 1-4, Mar.-Dec. 1993, pp. 135-150.
 [HalB90] Hall, Mark and John Barry (eds.). The SunTechnology Papers, Springer-Verlag, New York,
          NY, 1990.
  [Hall91] Hall, Mary Wolcott. Managing Interprocedural Optimization, Ph.D. thesis, Dept, of Comp.
           Sci., Rice Univ., Houston, TX, Apr. 1991.
  [Hay92] Hay, William. Personal communication, IBM Canada Lab., Toronto, Canada, May 1992.
  [Hay94] Hay, William. Personal communication, IBM Canada Lab., Toronto, Canada, June 1994.
810               B ib lio grap h y


       [Hech77] Hecht, Matthew S. Flow Analysis o f Computer Programs, Elsevier North-Holland, New
                York, NY, 1977.
       [HecU75] Hecht, Matthew S. and Jeffrey D. Ullman. A Simple Algorithm for Global Data Flow Prob­
                lems, SIAM J. o f Computing, Vol. 4, No. 4, Dec. 1975, pp. 519-532.
      [HenD89a] Henry, Robert R. and Peter C. Damron. Performance of Table-Driven Code Generators Using
                Tree-Pattern Matching, Tech. Rept. 89-02-02, Comp. Sci. Dept., Univ. of Washington, Seattle,
                WA, Feb. 1989.
  [HenD89b] Henry, Robert R. and Peter C. Damron. Algorithms for Table-Driven Code Generators Using
            Tree-Pattern Matching, Tech. Rept. 89-02-03, Comp. Sci. Dept., Univ. of Washington, Seattle,
            WA, Feb. 1989.
       [Hend90] Hendren, Laurie J. Parallelizing Programs with Recursive Data Structures, IEEE Trans, on
                Parallel and Distributed Systems, Vol. 1 , No. 1, Jan. 1990, pp. 35-47.
       [HenG83] Hennessy, John and Thomas Gross. Postpass Code Optimization of Pipeline Constraints,
                ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 5, No. 3, July 1983, pp. 422-448.
       [HenP94] Hennessy, John L. and David A. Patterson. Computer Organization and Design: The
                Hardware/Software Interface, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 1994.
        [Henr84] Henry, Robert R. Graham-Glanville Code Generators, Rept. UCB/CSD 84/184, Comp. Sci.
                 Division, Dept, of Elec. Engg. and Comp. Sci., Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA, May 1984.
       [HewP91] PA-RISC Procedure Calling Conventions Reference Manual, HP Part No. 09740-90015,
                Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, CA, Jan. 1991.
      [HimC87] Himelstein, Mark I., Fred C. Chow, and Kevin Enderby. Cross-Module Optimization: Its
               Implementation and Benefits, Proc. o f the Summer 1987 USENIX Conf., Phoenix, AZ, June
               1987, pp. 347-356.
       [Hime91] Himelstein, Mark I. Compiler Tail Ends, tutorial notes, ACM SIGPLAN ’91 Conf. on Pro­
                gramming Language Design and Implementation, Toronto, Ontario, June 1991.
       [H of082] Hoffman, C.W. and Michael J. O ’Donnell. Pattern Matching in Trees, JACM, Vol. 29, No. 1,
                 Jan. 1982, pp. 68-95.
       [Hopk87] Hopkins, Martin. A Perspective on the 801/Reduced Instruction Set Computer, IBM Sys­
                tems J., Vol. 26, No. 1, 1987, pp. 107-121; also in [Stal90], pp. 176-190.
      [HumH94] Hummel, Joseph, Laurie J. Hendren, and Alexandru Nicolau. A General Data Dependence
               Test for Dynamic, Pointer-Based Data Structures, in [PLDI94], pp. 218-229.
       [IBMJ901 IBM /. o f Research and Development, special issue on the IBM Rise System/6000 Processor,
                Vol. 34, No. 1, Jan. 1990.
        [IEEE83] IEEE Standard Pascal Computer Programming Language, Inst, of Elec, and Electronic Engrs.,
                 New York, NY, 1983.
        [IEEE85] IEEE Standard for Binary Floating-Point Arithmetic, ANSI/IEEE Std 754-1985, Inst, of Elec,
                 and Electronic Engrs., New York, NY, 1985.
        [Inge61] Ingerman, Peter Z. Thunks, CACM, Vol. 4, No. 1, Jan. 1961, pp. 55-58.
         [Inte93] Intel Reference Compiler for the Intel 386, Intel 486, and Pentium Microprocessor Family:
                  An Overview, Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA, 1993.
           Bibliography                                                                              811
  [Jain91] Jain, Sunil. Circular Scheduling: A New Technique to Perform Software Pipelining, in
           [PLDI91],pp. 219-228.
  [JaiT88] Jain, Sunil and Carol Thompson. An Efficient Approach to Data Flow Analysis in a Multiple
           Pass Global Optimizer, in [PLDI88], pp. 154-163.
 [JohM86] Johnson, Mark S. and Terrence C. Miller. Effectiveness of a Machine-Level, Global Optimizer,
          in [Comp86], pp. 99-108.
  [John78] Johnson, Steven C. A Portable Compiler: Theory and Practice, in [POPL78], pp. 97-104.
  [JohP93] Johnson, Richard and Keshav Pingali. Dependence-Based Program Analysis, in [PLDI93], pp.
           78-89.
 [JonM76] Jones, Neil D. and Steven S. Muchnick. Binding Time Optimization in Programming Lan­
          guages: Some Thoughts Toward the Design of an Ideal Language, in [POPL76], pp. 77-94.
 [JonM78] Jones, Neil D. and Steven S. Muchnick. TEMPO: A Unified Treatment of Binding Time and
          Parameter Passing Concepts in Programming Languages,        Lecture Notes in Comp. Sci
                                                                                          ., Vol.
          66, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1978.
[JonM81a] Jones, Neil D. and Steven S. Muchnick. Flow Analysis and Optimization of usp-Like Struc­
          tures, in [MucJ81], pp. 102-131.
[JonM81b] Jones, Neil D. and Steven S. Muchnick. Complexity of Flow Analysis, Inductive Assertion
          Synthesis, and a Language Due to Dijkstra, in [MucJ81], pp. 380-393.
[KamU75] Kam, J.B. and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Monotone Data Flow Analysis Frameworks, Tech. Rept.
         No. 169, Dept, of Elec. Engg., Princeton Univ., Princeton, NJ, 1975.
[KanH92] Kane, Gerry and Joe Heinreich.     MIPS RISC Architecture, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
         NJ, 1992.
  [Karr84] Karr, Michael. Code Generation by Coagulation, in [Comp84], pp. 1-12.
 [Keho93] Kehoe, Brendan P.   Zen and the Art of the Internet, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.
  [Keil94] Keilman, Keith. Personal communication, Hewlett-Packard, Cupertino, CA, June 1994.
 [Kenn71] Kennedy, Ken.    Global Flow Analysis and Register Allocation for Simple Code Structures,
          Ph.D. thesis, Courant Inst., New York Univ., New York, NY, Oct. 1971.
 [Kenn75] Kennedy, Ken. Node Listing Applied to Data Flow Analysis, in [POPL75], pp. 10-21.
 [Kenn81] Kennedy, Ken. A Survey of Data Flow Analysis Techniques, in [MucJ81], pp. 5-54.
 [Kenn86] Kennedy, Ken. PTOOL, Tech. Rept., Dept, of Math. Sci., Rice Univ., Houston, TX, 1986.
 [KerE93] Kerns, Daniel R. and Susan J. Eggers. Balanced Scheduling: Instruction Scheduling When
          Memory Latency Is Uncertain, in [PLDI93], pp. 278-289.
 [KheD99] Khedker, Uday P. and Dananjay M. Dhamdhere. Bidirectional Data Flow Analysis: Myths and
          Reality, ACM    SIGPLAN Notices,  Vol. 34, No. 6, June 1999, pp. 47-57. (Added in 2000, 4th
          printing; supports corrections made on pages 229, 264, and 407 in that printing.)
  [Kild73] Kildall, Gary A. A Unified Approach to Global Program Optimization, in [POPL73], pp.
           194-206.
 [KnoR92] Knoop, Jens, Oliver Riithing, and Bernhard Steffen. Lazy Code Motion, in [PLDI92], pp.
          224-234.
812              B ib lio grap h y


      [KnoR93] Knoop, Jens, Oliver Riithing, and Bernhard Steffen. Lazy Strength Reduction,/ . o f Program­
               ming Languages, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1993, pp. 71-91.
      fKnoR94] Knoop, Jens, Oliver Riithing, and Bernhard Steffen. Partial Dead Code Elimination, in
               [PLDI94], pp. 147-158.
      [KnoZ92] Knobe, Kathleen and F. Kenneth Zadeck. Register Allocation Using Control Trees, Tech. Rept.
               No. CS-92-13, Dept, of Comp. Sci., Brown Univ., Providence, RI, Mar. 1992.
      [Knut62] Knuth, Donald E. A History of Writing Compilers, Computers and Automation, Dec. 1962,
               pp. 8-10, 12, 14, 16, 18.
      [Knut71] Knuth, Donald E. An Empirical Study of Fortran Programs, Software—Practice and Experi­
               ence■, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1971, pp. 105-134.
      [Knut73] Knuth, Donald E. The Art o f Computer Programming, Vo/. 3: Sorting and Searching,
               Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1973.
      [KolW95] Kolte, Pryadarshan and Michael Wolfe. Elimination of Redundant Array Subscript Checks,
               in [PLDI95], pp. 270-278.
       [Kou77] Kou, Lawrence T. On Live-Dead Analysis for Global Data Flow Problems, JACM, Vol. 24,
               No. 3, July 1977, pp. 473-483.
       [Kris90] Krishnamurthy, San jay. Static Scheduling o f Multi-Cycle Operations for a Pipelined RISC
                Processor; M.S. paper, Dept, of Comp. Sci., Clemson Univ., Clemson, SC, May 1990.
       [Krol92] Krol, Ed. The Whole Internet User's Guide and Catalog, O ’Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol,
                CA, 1992.
      [Kuck74] Kuck, David J. Measurements of Parallelism in Ordinary Fortran Programs, Computer; Vol.
               7, No. 1, Jan. 1974, pp. 37-46.
       [Lam 8 8 ] Lam, Monica S. Software Pipelining: An Efficient Scheduling Technique for v l i w Machines,
                  in [PLDI8 8 ], pp. 318-328.
       [Lam90] Lam, Monica S. Instruction Scheduling for Superscalar Architectures, in Joseph F. Traub (ed.).
               Annual Review o f Comp. Sci., Vol. 4, Annual Reviews, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, 1990, pp. 173-
               201   .
      [LamR91] Lam, Monica, Edward E. Rothberg, and Michael E. Wolf. The Cache Performance and
               Optimization of Blocked Algorithms, in [ASPL91], pp. 63-74.
       [LanJ82] Landwehr, Rudolf, Hans-Stephan Jansohn, and Gerhard Goos. Experience with an Automatic
                Code Generator Generator, in [Comp82], pp. 56-66.
      [LarH 8 6 ] Larus, James and Paul Hilfinger. Register Allocation in the s p u r Lisp Compiler, in [Comp 8 6 ],
                  pp. 255-263.
       [Laru89] Larus, James R. Restructuring Symbolic Programs for Correct Execution on Multiprocessors,
                Tech. Rept. UCB/CSD/89/502, Comp. Sci. Division, Univ. of California, Berkeley, CA, May
                1989.
       [Laru90] Larus, James R. Abstract Execution: A Technique for Efficiently Tracing Programs, Soft­
                ware—Practice and Experience, Vol. 20, No. 12, Dec. 1990, pp. 1241-1258.
      [LawL87] Lawler, Eugene, Jan Karel Lenstra, Charles Martel, and Barbara Simons. Pipeline Scheduling:
               A Survey, Comp. Sci. Research Rept. RJ 5738, IBM Research Division, San Jose, CA, July
               1987.
           Bibliography                                                                          813


   [Lee89] Lee, Peter H. Realistic Compiler Generation, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1989.
   [Lee91] Lee, Peter H. (ed.). Topics in Advanced Language Implementation, MIT Press, Cambridge,
           MA, 1991.
 [LenT79] Lengauer, Thomas and Robert E. Tarjan. A Fast Algorithm for Finding Dominators in a
          Flowgraph, ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 1, No. 1, July 1979, pp. 121-141.
 [LevC80] Leverett, Bruce W., Roderic G.G. Cattell, Steven O. Hobbs, Joseph M. Newcomer, Andrew
          H. Reiner, Bruce R. Schatz, and William A Wulf. An Overview of the Production-Quality
          Compiler-Compiler Project, Computer; Vol. 13, No. 8 , Aug. 1980, pp. 38-49.
 [LoEg95] Lo, Jack L. and Susan Eggers. Improving Balanced Scheduling with Compiler Optimizations
          that Increase Instruction-Level Parallelism, in [PLDI95], pp. 151-162.
[LowM69] Lowry, E. and C.W. Medlock. Object Code Optimization, CACM, Vol. 12, No. 1, 1969, pp.
         13-22.
[MahC92] Mahlke, Scott A., Pohua P. Chang, William Y. Chen, John C. Gyllenhaal, Wen-mei W.
         Hwu, and Tokuzo Kiyohara. Compiler Code Transformations for Superscalar-Based High-
         Performance Systems, Proc. o f Supercomputing ’92, Minneapolis, MN, Nov. 1992, pp. 808-
         817.
[MahR94] Mahadevan, Uma and Sridhar Ramakrishnan. Instruction Scheduling over Regions: A Frame­
         work for Scheduling Across Basic Blocks, Proc. o f Compiler Constr. ’94, Edinburgh, Lecture
         Notes in Comp. Sci., Vol. 786, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994.
[MauF81] Mauney, John and Charles N. Fischer. ECP—An Error Correcting Parser Generator: User
         Guide, Tech. Rept. 450, Comp. Sci. Dept., Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, Oct. 1981.
[MayH91] Maydan, Dror E., John L. Hennessy, and Monica S. Lam. An Efficient Method for Exact
         Dependence Analysis, in [PLDI91], pp. 1-14.
 [McFa89] McFarling, Scott. Program Optimization for Instruction Caches, in [ASPL89], pp. 183-191.
[McFa91a] McFarling, Scott. Procedure Merging with Instruction Caches, in [PLDI91], pp. 71-79.
[McFa91b] McFarling, Scott. Program Analysis and Optimization for Machines with Instruction Cache,
          Ph.D. dissertation, Tech. Rept. CSL-TR-91-493, Comp. Systems Lab., Stanford Univ., Stan­
          ford, CA, Sept. 1991.
  [Mill92] Miller, James A. Personal communication, Hewlett-Packard, Cupertino, CA, Apr. 1992.
 [MilT90] Milner, Robin, M. Tofte, and R. Harper. The Definition o f Standard ML, MIT Press, Cam­
          bridge, MA, 1990.
[MitM79] Mitchell, James G., William Maybury, and Richard Sweet. Mesa Language Manual, Version
         5.0, Tech. Rept. CSL-79-3, Xerox Palo Alto Research Ctr., Palo Alto, CA, Apr. 1979.
[MorR79] Morel, Etienne and Claude Renvoise. Global Optimization by Suppression of Partial Redun­
         dancies, CACM, Vol. 22, No. 2, Feb. 1979, pp. 96-103.
[MorR81] Morel, Etienne and Claude Renvoise. Interprocedural Elimination of Partial Redundancies,
         in [MucJ81], pp. 160-188.
 [Morr91] Morris, W.G. CCG: A Prototype Coagulating Code Generator, in [PLDI91], pp. 45-58.
814              B ib lio grap h y


      [MowL92] Mowry, Todd C., Monica S. Lam, and Anoop Gupta. Design and Evaluation of a Compiler
               Algorithm for Prefetching, in [ASPL92], pp. 62-73.
      [Mowr94] Mowry, Todd C. Tolerating Latency Through Software-Controlled Prefetching, Ph.D. disser­
               tation, Dept, of Elec. Engg., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, Mar. 1994.
      [Much 8 8 ] Muchnick, Steven S. Optimizing Compilers for SPARC, SunTechnology, Vol. 1, No. 3,
                  summer 1988, pp. 64-77; also appeared in [HalB90], pp. 41-68, and in [Stal90], pp. 160-
                  173.
      [Much91] Muchnick, Steven S. Optimization in the SPARCompilers, Proc. o f the Sun Users’ Group
               Conf., Atlanta, GA, June 1991, pp. 81-99; also appeared in Proc. o f Sun USER ’91, Bir­
               mingham, England, Sept. 1991, pp. 117-136, and in README, Sun Users’ Group, 1991, pp.
               1-13 and 20-23.
       [MucJ81] Muchnick, Steven S. and Neil D. Jones (eds.). Program Flow Analysis: Theory and Applica­
                tions, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1981.
       [Myer81] Myers, E.A. Precise Interprocedural Data Flow Analysis Framework, in [POPL81], pp. 219-
                230.
       [Nick90] Nickerson, Brian. Graph Coloring Register Allocation for Processors with Multi-Register
                Operands, in [PLDI90], pp. 40-52.
       [Nico 8 6 ] Nicolau, Alexandru. A Fine-Grain Parallelizing Compiler, Tech. Rept. TR-86-792, Dept, of
                   Comp. Sci., Cornell Univ., Ithaca, NY, Dec. 1986.
      [OBrH90] O’Brien, Kevin, Bill Hay, Joanne Minish, Hartmann Schaffer, Bob Schloss, Arvin Shepherd,
               and Matthew Zaleski. Advanced Compiler Technology for the Rise System/6000 Architecture,
               in Misra, Mamata (ed.). IBM RISC System/6000 Technology, Publication SA23-2619, IBM
               Corp., Austin, TX, 1990, pp. 154-161.
      [0B r095] O ’Brien, Kevin, Kathryn M. O ’Brien, Martin Hopkins, Arvin Shepherd, and Ron Unrau. XIL
                and YIL: The Intermediate Languages of tobey , Proc. o f the ACM SIGPLAN Workshop
                on Intermediate Representations, San Francisco, CA, Jan. 1995, published as Microsoft
                Tech. Rept. MSR-TR-95-01, Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, Jan. 1995, and as SIGPLAN
                Notices, Vol. 30, No. 3, Mar. 1995, pp. 71-82.
        [PaiS77] Paige, Bob and Jack T. Schwartz. Expression Continuity and the Formal Differentiation of
                 Algorithms, in [POPL77], pp. 58-71.
        [Patt95] Patterson, Jason R.C. Accurate Static Branch Prediction by Value Range Propagation, in
                 [PLDI95], pp. 67-78.
        [Pele8 8 ] Pelegri-Llopart, Eduardo. Rewrite Systems, Pattern Matching, and Code Generation, Ph.D.
                   dissertation, Rept. No. UCB/CSD 88/423, Comp. Sci. Division, Univ. of California, Berkeley,
                   CA, June 1988.
       [PelG881 Pelegri-Llopart, Eduardo and Susan L. Graham. Code Generation for Expression Trees: An
                Application of burs Theory, in [POPL8 8 ], pp. 294-308.
        [Pent94] Pentium Family User’s Manual, Volume 3: Architecture and Programming Manual, Intel
                 Corp., Mount Prospect, IL, 1994.
       [PetH90] Pettis, Karl and Robert C. Hansen. Profile Guided Code Positioning, in [PLDI90], pp. 16-27.
           Bibliography                                                                     815
 [Pint93] Pinter, Shlomit S. Register Allocation with Instruction Scheduling: A New Approach, in
          [PLDI93], pp. 248-257.
[PLDI88]  Proc. of the SIGPLAN *88 Symp. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          Atlanta, GA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 23, No. 7, June 1988.
 [PLDI89] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *89 Symp. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          Portland, OR, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 24, No. 7, July 1989.
 [PLDI90] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *90 Symp. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          White Plains, NY, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 25, No. 6, June 1990.
 [PLDI91] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *91 Symp. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          Toronto, Ontario, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 26, No. 6, June 1991.
 [PLDI92] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *92 Symp. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          San Francisco, CA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 27, No. 7, July 1992.
 [PLDI93] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *93 Symp. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          Albuquerque, NM, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 28, No. 7, July 1993.
 [PLDI94] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *94 Conf. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          Orlando, FL, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 29, No. 6, June 1994.
 [PLDI95] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *95 Conf. on Programming Language Design and Implementation, La
          Jolla, CA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 30, No. 6, June 1995.
 [PLDI96] Proc. of the SIGPLAN *96 Conf. on Programming Language Design and Implementation,
          Philadelphia, PA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 31, No. 5, May 1996.
[POPL73] Conf. Record of the ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming Lan­
          guages, Boston, MA, Oct. 1973.
[POPL75] Conf. Record of the 2nd ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Palo Alto, CA, Jan. 1975.
[POPL76] Conf. Record of the 3rd ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Atlanta, GA, Jan. 1976.
[POPL77] Conf. Record of the 4th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Los Angeles, CA, Jan. 1977.
[POPL78] Conf. Record of the 5th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Tucson, AZ, Jan. 1978.
[POPL79] Conf. Record of the 6th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, San Antonio, TX, Jan. 1979.
[POPL80] Conf. Record of the 7th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Las Vegas, NV, Jan. 1980.
[POPL81] Conf Record of the 8th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Williamsburg, VA, Jan. 1981.
[POPL82] Conf. Record of the 9th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
          Languages, Albuquerque, NM, Jan. 1982.
816              Bibliography


      [POPL84]   Conf. Record of the 11th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, Salt Lake City, UT, Jan. 1984.
       [POPL86] Conf Record of the 13th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, St. Petersburg Beach, FL, Jan. 1986.
       [POPL88] Conf Record of the 15th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, San Diego, CA, Jan. 1988.
       [POPL89] Conf Record of the 16th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, Austin, TX, Jan. 1989.
       [POPL90] Conf. Record of the 17th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, San Francisco, CA, Jan. 1990.
       [POPL91] Conf. Record of the 18th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, Orlando, FL, Jan. 1991.
       [POPL92] Conf. Record of the 19th ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, Albuquerque, NM, Jan. 1992.
       [POPL94] Conf. Record of the 21st ACM SIGACT/SIGPLAN Symp. on Principles of Programming
                 Languages, Portland, OR, Jan. 1994.
      [POWE90] POWER Processor Architecturey Version 1.52, IBM Corp., Austin, TX, Feb. 1990.
        [Powe93] PowerPC Architecture, first edition, IBM Corp., Austin, TX, May 1993.
       [ProF94] Proebsting, Todd A. and Christopher W. Fraser. Detecting Pipeline Structural Hazards Quickly,
                in [POPL94], pp. 280-286.
      [PugW92] Pugh, William and David Wonnacott. Eliminating False Data Dependences Using the Omega
               Test, in [PLDI92], pp. 140-151.
       [Radi82] Radin, George. The 801 Minicomputer, in [ASPL82], pp. 39-47.
       [RaoS95] Rao, Suresh, William A. Savage, and Kevin J. Smith. Personal communication, Intel Corp.,
                Santa Clara, CA, Mar. 1995.
      [RauG81] Rau, B.R. and C.D. Glaeser. Some Scheduling Techniques and an Easily Schedulable Hor­
               izontal Architecture for High Performance Scientific Computing,   Proc. of the 14th Annual
                 Microprogramming Workshop,   Chatham, MA, published as       SIGMicro Newsletter,
                                                                                             Vol. 12,
               No. 4, Dec. 1981, pp. 183-198.
       [ReiL77] Reif, John R. and Harry R. Lewis. Symbolic Evaluation and the Global Value Graph, in
                [POPL77], pp. 104-118.
       [ReiL86] Reif, John R. and Harry R. Lewis. Efficient Symbolic Analysis of Programs,   J. of Comp, and
                 System Sci.,
                            Vol. 32, No. 3, June 1986, pp. 280-313.
       [Reyn68] Reynolds, John C. Automatic Computation of Data Set Definitions,          Proc. of the IFIP
                 Congress 1968,
                              Aug. 1968, pp. B69-B73.
      [RicG89a] Richardson, Stephen E. and Mahadevan Ganapathi. Interprocedural Optimization: Experi­
                mental Results,    Software—Practice and Experience,
                                                              Vol. 19, No. 2, Feb. 1989, pp. 149-169.
      [RicG89b] Richardson, Stephen E. and Mahadevan Ganapathi. Interprocedural Analysis vs. Procedure
                Integration,    Information Processing Letters,
                                                       Vol. 32, Aug. 1989, pp. 137-142.
          Bibliography                                                                              817

 [Rich91] Richardson, Stephen C. Evaluating Interprocedural Code Optimization Techniques, Ph.D.
          dissertation, Tech. Rept. CSL-TR-91-460, Comp. Sci. Lab., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA,
          Feb. 1991.
[RogL92] Rogers, Anne and Kai Li. Software Support for Speculative Loads, in [ASPL92], pp. 38-50.
[Rose77] Rosen, Barry K. High-Level Data Flow Analysis, CACM, Vol. 20, No. 10, Oct. 1977, pp.
         712-724.
[Rose79] Rosen, Barry K. Data Flow Analysis for Procedural Languages, JACM , Vol. 26, No. 2, Apr.
         1977, pp. 322-344.
[Rose81] Rosen, Barry K. Degrees of Availability as an Introduction to the General Theory of Data
         Flow Analysis, in [MucJ81], pp. 55-76.
[RutG96] Ruttenberg, John, G.R. Gao, A. Stoutchinin, and W. Lichtenstein. Software Pipelining Show­
         down: Optimal vs. Heuristic Methods in a Production Compiler, in [PLDI96], pp. 1-11.
[Ryma82] Rymarczyk, J.W. Coding Guidelines for Pipelined Processors, in [ASPL82], pp. 12-19.
[SanO90] Santhanam, Vatsa and Daryl Odnert. Register Allocation Across Procedure and Module
         Boundaries, in [PLDI90], pp. 28-39.
 [Sava95] Savage, William A. Personal communication, Intel Corp., Santa Clara, CA, Sept. 1995.
 [Schl91] Schlansker, Michael. Compilation for v l i w and Superscalar Processors, tutorial notes, Fourth
          Inti. Conf. on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems,
          Santa Clara, CA, Apr. 1991.
 [SchS79] Schwartz, Jacob T. and Micha Sharir. A Design for Optimizations of the Bitvectoring Class,
          Comp. Sci. Rept. No. 17, Courant Inst, of Math. Sci., New York Univ., New York, NY,
          1979.
[Schw73] Schwartz, Jacob T. On Programming: An Interim Rept. on the SETL Project, Installment II,
         Comp. Sci. Dept., Courant Inst, of Math. Sci., New York Univ., New York, NY, 1973.
 [SetU70] Sethi, Ravi and Jeffrey D. Ullman. The Generation of Optimal Code for Arithmetic Expres­
          sions, JACM, Vol. 17, No. 4, Oct. 1970, pp. 715-728.
 [Shar80] Sharir, Micha. Structural Analysis: A New Approach to Flow Analysis in Optimizing Compil­
          ers, Computer Languages, Vol. 5, Nos. 3/4, 1980, pp. 141-153.
 [ShaS69] Shapiro, R.M. and H. Saint. The Representation of Algorithms, Tech. Rept. RADC-TR-69-
          313, Volume II, Rome Air Development Center, Griffiss Air Force Base, NY, Sept. 1969; also
          published as Tech. Rept. CA-7002-1432, Massachusetts Computer Associates, Wakefield,
          MA, Feb. 1970.
 [ShiP89] Shieh, J.J. and C.A. Papachristou. On Reordering Instruction Streams for Pipelined Proces­
          sors, Proc. o f the 22nd Annual Inti. Symp. on Microarchitecture, Dublin, Ireland, Aug. 1989,
          pp. 199-206.
[Simp96] Simpson, Loren Taylor. Value-Driven Redundancy Elimination, Ph.D. thesis, Dept, of Comp.
         Sci., Rice Univ., Houston, TX, Apr. 1996.
 [SitC92] Sites, Richard L., Anton Chernoff, Matthew B. Kirk, Maurice P. Marks, and Scott G. Robin­
          son. Binary Translation, Digital Tech. ]., Vol. 4, No. 4, special issue, 1992; also appeared in
          slightly different form in CACM, Vol. 36, No. 2, Feb. 1993, pp. 69-81.
818              B ib lio grap h y


      [SmoK91] Smotherman, Mark, Sanjay Krishnamurthy, P.S. Aravind, and David Hunnicutt. Efficient
               DAG Construction and Heuristic Calculation for Instruction Scheduling, Proc. o f the 24th
               Annual Inti. Symp. on Microarchitecture, Albuquerque, NM , Nov. 1991, pp. 93-102.
      [SPAR92] The SPARC Architecture Manual, Version 8, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1992.
      [SPEC89] SPEC newsletter, Vol. 1, No. 1, Systems Performance Evaluation Cooperative, Fremont, CA,
               1989.
       [SriW93] Srivastava, Amitabh and David W. Wall. A Practical System for Intermodule Code Optimiza­
                tion at Link-Time,/, o f Programming Languages, Vol. 1, No. 1, 1993, pp. 1-18.
      [SriW94] Srivastava, Amitabh and David W. Wall. Link-Time Optimization of Address Calculation on
               a 64-Bit Architecture, in [PLDI94], pp. 49-60.
        [Stal90] Stallings, William. Reduced Instruction Set Computers, second edition, IEEE Comp. Society
                 Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 1990.
       [Stee84] Steele, Guy L., Jr. COM M ON LISP: The Language, Digital Press, Burlington, MA, 1984.
       [SteH89] Steenkiste, Peter and John Hennessy. A Simple Interprocedural Register Allocation Algorithm
                and Its Effectiveness for lisp , ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 11, No. 1 , Jan. 1989, pp. 1-32.
       [Stro8 8 ] Stroustrup, Bjarne. Type-Safe Linkage for C++, Computing Systems, Vol. 6 , No. 4, 1988, pp.
                  371-404.
       [Tarj72] Tarjan, Robert Endre. Depth First Search and Linear Graph Algorithms, SIAM J. o f Comput­
                ing, Vol. 1, No. 2, 1972, pp. 146-160.
       [Tarj74] Tarjan, Robert Endre. Testing Flow Graph Reducibility, J. o f Comp, and System Sci., Vol. 9,
                No. 4, Dec. 1974, pp. 355-365.
       [Tarj81] Tarjan, Robert Endre. Fast Algorithms for Solving Path Problems, JACM, Vol. 28, No. 3, July
                1981, pp. 591-642.
      [Tene74a] Tenenbaum, Aaron. Type Determination for Very High Level Languages, Rept. NSO-3,
                Comp. Sci. Dept., New York Univ., New York, NY, Oct. 1974.
      [Tene74b] Tenenbaum, Aaron. Compile Time Type Determination in SETL, Proc. o f the ACM Annual
                Conf., San Diego, CA, Nov. 1974, pp. 95-100.
      [Thom92] Thompson, Carol. Personal communication, Hewlett-Packard, Cupertino, CA, May 1992.
      [Tiem89] Tiemann, Michael D. The GNU Instruction Scheduler, CS 343 Report, Dept, of Comp. Sci.,
               Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, June 1989; also appeared in an updated form as Cygnus Tech.
               Rept. CTR-0, Cygnus Support, Mountain View, CA, 1989.
       [Tjia93] Tjiang, Steven W.K. Automatic Generation o f Data-Flow Analyzers: A Tool for Building
                Optimizers, Ph.D. dissertation, Dept, of Comp. Sci., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, July
                1993.
       [TjiH92] Tjiang, Steven W.K. and John L. Hennessy. Sharlit—A Tool for Building Optimizers, in
                [PLDI92], pp. 82-93.
      [TjiW91] Tjiang, Steven W.K., Michael E. Wolf, Monica S. Lam, K.L. Pieper, and John L. Hennessy.
               Integrating Scalar Optimization and Parallelization, Proc. o f 4th Workshop on Languages
               and Compilers for Parallel Computing, Santa Clara, CA, Aug. 1991, pp. 137-151.
            Bibliography                                                                       819


  [Towl76] Towle, Robert A. Control and Data Dependence for Program Transformations, Ph.D. thesis,
           Dept, of Comp. Sci., Univ. of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, IL, Mar. 1976.
  [Ullm73] Ullman, Jeffrey D. Fast Algorithms for the Elimination of Common Subexpressions, Acta
           Informatica, Vol. 2, Fasc. 3, July 1973, pp. 191-213.
 [Unga87] Ungar, David M. The Design and Evaluation o f a High Performance Smalltalk System, MIT
          Press, Cambridge, MA, 1987.
 [UngS91] Ungar, David M. and Randall B. Smith, self : The Power of Simplicity, Lisp and Symbolic
          Computation, Vol. 4, No. 3, June 1991, pp. 187-205.
  [Unic90] Unicode Consortium. The Unicode Standard: Worldwide Character Encoding, Version 1.0,
           Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1990.
[UNIX90a] UNIX Software Operation. System V Application Binary Interface, UNIX Press/Prentice-Hall,
          Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
[UNIX90b] UNIX Software Operation. System V Application Binary Interface: Motorola 88000 Proces­
          sor Supplement, UNIX Press/Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
[UNIX90c] UNIX Software Operation. System V Application Binary Interface: SPARC Processor Supple­
          ment, UNIX Press/Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1990.
 [UNIX91] UNIX System Labs. System V Application Binary Interface: Intel i860 Processor Supplement,
          UNIX Press/Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1991.
 [UNIX93] UNIX System Labs. System V Application Binary Interface: Intel 386 Architecture Processor
          Supplement, UNIX Press/Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.
  [Wall86] Wall, David W. Global Register Allocation at Link Time, in [Comp86], pp. 264-275.
  [Wall88] Wallace, David R. Dependence Among Multi-Dimensional Array References, Proc. o f the
           1988 ACM Inti. Conf. on Supercomputing, St. Malo, France, July 1988, pp. 418-428.
  [Wall91] Wall, David W. Predicting Program Behavior from Real or Estimated Profiles, in [PLDI91],
           pp. 59-70.
  [Wall92] Wallace, David R. Cross-Block Scheduling Using the Extended Dependence Graph, Proc. o f
           the 1992 Inti. Conf. on Supercomputing, Washington, DC, July 1992, pp. 72-81.
 [WanE93] Wang, Jian and Christine Eisenbeis. Decomposed Software Pipelining, Tech. Rept. No. 1838,
          INRIA, Le Chesnay, France, Jan. 1993.
  [Warr90] Warren, Henry S. Instruction Scheduling for the IBM Rise System/6000, in [IBMJ90], pp.
           85-92.
 [WeaG94] Weaver, David L. and Tom Germond. The SPARC Architecture Manual, Version 9, Prentice-
          Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1994.
 [WegZ91] Wegman, Mark N. and F. Kenneth Zadeck. Constant Propagation with Conditional Branches,
          ACM TOPLAS, Vol. 13, No. 2, Apr. 1991, pp. 181-210.
  [Weic84] Weicker, Reinhold P. Dhrystone: A Synthetic Systems Programming Benchmark, CACM, Vol.
           27, No. 10, Oct. 1984, pp. 1013-1030.
 [WeiC94] Weise, Daniel, Roger F. Crew, Michael Ernst, and Bjarne Steensgaard. Value Dependence
          Graphs: Representation Without Taxation, in [POPL94], pp. 287-296.
820              Bibliography

      [Weih80] Weihl, William E. Interprocedural Data Flow Analysis in the Presence of Pointers, Procedure
               Variables, and Label Variables, in [POPL80], pp. 83-94.
      [Wexe81] Wexelblat, Richard L. History o f Programming Languages, Academic Press, New York, NY,
               1981.
      [WhiS90] Whitfield, Debbie and Mary Lou Soffa. An Approach to Ordering Optimizing Transforma­
               tions, Proc. o f the Second ACM Symp. on Principles and Practice o f Parallel Programming,
               Seattle, WA, published as SIGPLAN Notices, Vol. 25, No. 3, Mar. 1990, pp. 137-146.
      [Wism94] Wismiiller, Roland. Debugging Globally Optimized Programs Using Data Flow Analysis, in
               [PLDI94], pp. 278-289.
      [Wolf89a] Wolfe, Michael R. More Iteration Space Tiling, Tech. Rept. No. CS/E 89-003, Dept, of Comp.
                Sci. and Engg., Oregon Graduate Inst., Beaverton, OR, May 1989.
      [Wolf89b] Wolfe, Michael R. Optimizing Supercompilers for Supercomputers, MIT Press, Cambridge,
                MA, 1989.
       [Wolf90] Wolfe, Michael R. Scalar vs. Parallel Optimizations, Tech. Rept. No. CS/E 90-010, Dept, of
                Comp. Sci. and Engg., Oregon Graduate Inst., Beaverton, OR, July 1990.
       [Wolf92] Wolf, Michael E. Improving Locality and Parallelism in Nested Loops, Ph.D. dissertation,
                Tech. Rept. CSL-TR-92-538, Comp. Systems Lab., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, Aug. 1992.
       [Wolf96] Wolfe, Michael R. High-Performance Compilers for Parallel Computing, Addison-Wesley,
                Redwood City, CA, 1996.
      [WolH90] Wolfe, Michael R. and Robert Halstead (eds.). Proc. o f a Workshop on Parallelism in the
               Presence o f Pointers and Dynamically Allocated Objects, Tech. Note SRC-TN-90-292, Inst,
               for Defense Analyses Supercomputing Research Ctr., Bowie, MD, Mar. 1990.
      [WolL91] Wolf, Michael E. and Monica S. Lam. A Data Locality Optimizing Algorithm, in [PLDI91],
               pp. 30-44.
      [WolT90] Wolfe, Michael R. and Chau-Wen Tseng. The Power Test for Data Dependence, Tech. Rept.
               No. CS/E 90-015, Dept, of Comp. Sci. and Engg., Oregon Graduate Inst., Beaverton, OR,
               Aug. 1990.
      [WulJ75] Wulf, William A., Richard K. Johnsson, Charles B. Weinstock, Steven O. Hobbs, and Charles
               M. Geschke. The Design o f an Optimizing Compiler; American Elsevier, New York, NY,
               1975.
      [WulR71] Wulf, William A., David B. Russell, and A. Nico Habermann. bliss : A Language for Systems
               Programming, CACM, Vol. 14, No. 12, Dec. 1971, pp. 780-790.
      [Zade84] Zadeck, F. Kenneth. Incremental Data Flow Analysis in a Structured Program Editor, in
               [Comp84], pp. 132-143.
      [ZimC91] Zima, Hans with Barbara Chapman. Supercompilers for Parallel and Vector Machines, ACM
               Press/Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1991.


                                                      ‘Begin at the beginning, the King said, gravely,
                                                       ‘and go until you come to the end; then stop.’
                                                     —Carrol, Lewis, Alice in W onderland , Chap. 11.
                                                                                    T ech n ical In dex

                                                                            Mathematical Formulas
                                                                                  ICAN Procedures
                                                                        Major ICAN Data Structures




Boldface italic page numbers           ANEAin( ), 411                           Bind.PairsC), in interprocedural
indicate definitions of entries, and   anon,303                                      alias analysis, 643, 645
roman page numbers indicate            anon(ty), 303                            binexp, 85
descriptions of entries.               ANTin( ), 410                            BinExp, 389, 419
                                       ANTloc(), 410                            BinExpIntPair, 392
           A                           ANTout{), 410, 410                       BinExpIntPairSet, 392
                                       any, 304                                 binif, 83
A (), 643                              any(ty), 304                             bintrap, 83
ACP, 356, 357                          append( ), 760                           BnerC), 245
Action( ), 142                         append_block( ), 93, 418                 BIV(),451
ActionRedn, 142,142                    append.preheader( ), 403                 Block, 92, 356
ActionType, 142                        a r g ( ) , 614, 617                     Block_Position(), 678, 679-680
Acyclic_Region_Type( ), 207,           area(), 522, 523                         Bp, 245
      208                              ArgReg, 4 87, 492                                )> 621
Add. IV ( ), 433                       A r it y ( ),3 5 3                       B re a d th .F irst ( ), 181, 400
A djLsts, 487, 487, 496, 507           arybinasgn, 87                           b se t, 400
AdjMtx, 487, 487, 495-496, 497         a ry re f, 87                            Bucket, 189
adjnds, 487, 496                       aryunasgn, 87                            Build_AdjLsts(), 487, 499
Adju s t .Neighbors ( ) , 505-506,     aryvalasgn, 87                           Bui Id.AdjMtx(), 487, 496, 497
      506                              Assign_Between( ), 431                   Build.All.Ebbs, 175, 176-177
Advance ( ) , 146                      Assign.RegsC ), 488, 506, 507            Build_Binding_Graph( ), 623,
AEin{), 387                            AvailRegs, 564, 566                             625, 645
AEinP( ) , 392                                                                  Build_Call_Graph(), 609-610,
AEinP{), 390                                          B                                611
AEinPSO, 392                                                                    Build_Call_Graph_with_PVVs( ),
AEout(), 387                           ^(AyBlk/ei;)) 245                             6 12-613,612,615
AEoutP(), 390                          BaseReg, 487,5 0 9                       Build.DAGC), 273, 274
Alias, 295                             Bui/ei), 245                             Build.EbbC), 175, 176
Alias{ ), 295, 296                     Bc (),2 4 5                              Build.Pair.GraphC), 649, 649,
ALIAS{ ), 642                          B(C,Btk/ek)(                                  651
ALIAS (), 648                          BestSched, 552, 553                      BV", 224, 236
AllEbbs, 176                           Bi, 239
A llo cate_R egisters( ), 488          Bile, 239, 245                                     C
Alloc.RegC), 59, 61                    binasgn, 83
Alloc_Reg_Anon( ), 60                  B in d.Local.V arsC ), 55, 56-57         call, 83
A11_SCC( ), 195                        B in d _ P a irs(), in interprocedural   callasgn, 84
Ancestor() ,1 8 9                            data-flow analysis, 624, 626       called(),631



                                                                                                              821
822                 Index o f Mathematical Formulas, ican Procedures, and Data Structures

c a llr e g , 89                           CurTime, 538                         D FS.Postorder ( ) , 207, 207
c a llr e g 2 , 89                         C v a l( ),6 3 8 ,6 3 9              D F up ( ), 2 5 4
c a llr e g 3 , 90                         Cyclic_Region_Type( ), 207,          D F ( ), 253-254, 2 5 4
c a llre g a sg n , 90                            208-209                       DF(), 254
c a l l s e t ( ), 610, 6 16,639                                                Discard_Symbol( ), 142
callset{), 620                                        D                         d isp , 496
callsites(), 620                                                                Disp, 4 8 7 , 507
Cands, 538                                 d ,2 7 7                             DMOD, 619
C an o n icalize( ), 451                   DAG, 274, 552                        D M O D (), 622
c a sta sg n , 83                          Dag, 552, 553                        Dom.Comp, 1 8 2 , 182-183
c e i l ( ), 55, 57                        Dead_Code_Elim( ), 594               Dom_Exits( ), 403
C harString, 32                            D ecr.L oo p.C t( ) , 553            Dom.Front( ), 255
C h ild ( ), 186, 189                      DEF ( )                              Domin(), 1 8 2
C lo s e ( ), 153, 153                        in interprocedural data-flow      Dominate( ), 418
C losure ( ) , 146                                analysis, 609, 619            Domin_Fast( ), 185, 1 8 6 - 1 8 7
C oalesce_N od es(), 674-675, 675             in live variables analysis, 445   Dom.Uses( ), 403
C o a le sc e _ R e g s(), 487, 498, 500   D e fin e s( )                       Double_DAG( ), 553, 555
C o a le s c e _ S e t s (), 392, 393         in register renaming, 565         D R E F { ), 620
co lo r, 496                                  in sparse conditional constant    D V { ) ,2 7 8
Color_to_Reg( ), 506                              propagation, 364
Commutative( ), 380                        defsave, 484
Compact ( ), 207                           DefsLiveExit ( ) , 564, 566                           E
com pact_path(), 573                       DefUses ( ) , 564-565, 566
Comp_Disp(), 507, 511                      defwt, 501                           EA R Lin{), 411, 411
Component, 247, 248                        DefWt, 487, 501                      E A R L ou t{), 411, 411
Compress ( ), 187                          Delay (), 538, 539                   EbbRoots, 175, 176-177
Compute_Delay ( ), 539                     DELAYin( ), 411                      ECands, 538
Com puteF_if_then_else( ), 248             DELAYout( ), 411                     Edge.Count( )
Compute_GM0D( ), 630, 632                  delete_block(), 95, 95, 581              in intraprocedural code
Compute_IM0D(), 623, 623                   Delete_Empty_Blocks(), 594                   partitioning, 678, 680
Compute.IM0DPLUS( ), 628                   delete_inst(), 94, 94, 450, 498          in sparse conditional constant
ComputeIn_then( ), 248                     Delete_Node( ), 572                          propagation, 364, 365,
Compute.RBMOD ( ) , 626, 626-627           Delete_Node_Applic(), 572                    366
C om pute_Spill_C osts( ),                 Depth, 60                            Edge.Set ( ), 364, 367
         487-488, 5 0 1 ,502               depth, 483                           edges( ) , 678
condasgn, 83                               depth (), 503                        ELabel( )> 351
Conf, 273, 274                             D epth _F irst_Search ( ), 178,      ELabelO, 352, 352, 354
C o n f lic t ( ) , 271                           179                           Elim_Chain_Loops( ), 145, 153,
const, 84, 90                              Depth_First_Search_Dom, 187                  153-154
Const, 81, 81                              Depth_First_Search_PP(), 180,        Elim_Unreach_Code( ), 581,
C on stan t( ) ,3 3 0 ,5 6 0                      180-181                               581
C onst_Eval( ), 330                        Depth_Sym_Tab( ), 54, 54, 59         e ls e , 87
ConstLat, 363, 364                         Derives ( ), 158                     e lta sg n , 83
Convert_0pnd(), 494                        Dest_Sym_Tab, 47, 47                 Emit_Instrs( ), 142, 144, 151
C O PY (), 358                             DF+ ( ), 254, 254                    Encl_Sym_Tab, 54, 54, 59
copywt, 501                                DF(), 254, 255                       endif, 87
CopyWt, 487, 501                           DFlocah 254                          entry, 171
C Pin{), 359, 360                          Dfn, 185                             entry+, 303, 305, 307, 308,
C P ou t(), 359, 360                       Dfn, 186, 630                                309-313
Create_Node( ), 207                        DFP, 256                             Envt( ) , 646
CTEdges, 205, 205                          D F.Plus ( ) , 254, 256              Epi, 552
CTNodes, 205, 205                          D F.Set ( ), 256                     EpsLast, 147, 147
                      Index of Mathematical Formulas, ica n Procedures, and Data Structures                                          823


ETime, 538, 540, 542                         Followl ( ) , 147                                              I
ETypeO , 180, 180                            Follow.Edge, 353, 354
E v a l( )                                   Formal_Aliases(), 6 5 0 -6 5 1 , 653              I C l a s s ( ), 544
   in interprocedural constant               F o rm als{), 620                                ICP, 2 2 4 -2 2 5 , 224
      propagation, 638                       FormalsC ) , 644                                  i d { ), 233, 236
   in dominator computation, 186,            Fp( ), 2 4 0                                     idom { ), 182
      188 , 189, 190                         Free_R eg( ) , 60, 60                             Id o m ( ) , 184, 189
EV A L()                                     F u s e _ B lo c k s () , 5 8 4 -5 8 5 , 584      IDom ( ), 2 55
    in global common-subexpression                                                             Idom_Comp() , 183-184, 184
         elimination, 3 8 5 ,3 8 5 - 3 8 6                                                     I f . I n s t ( ) , 593
                                                            G
    in very busy expressions                                                                  / m, 198
         analysis, 4 1 7                     g c d (), 2 8 1 -2 8 2                           IM O D (), 620, 623
EV A LP( ), 390                              G E N () , 221                                   IM O D + ( ), 620, 622, 628, 628
E v a l.R e lE x p r( ), 451                 G e n e ra liz e ( ) , 157, 157                  IMODPLUSC), 628, 630
E x e cF lagC ), 364, 365                    G e n e ra te ( ) , 143                          in ( ), 231, 2 3 1 ,2 3 2 ,2 3 4 , 237, 238,
ExecTimeC), 538, 539, 553, 558               G en _ In st( ) , 59                                       239, 240, 2 4 1 -2 4 2 , 243, 250
e x i t , 171                                G en .L d S t( ) , 63                            in d asgn , 83
e x i t - , 303                              G en _Sp ill_C o de( ) , 488, 507,               in d e lt a s g n , 83
E x its( ), 245                                      509, 510-511                             Init, 231, 234
E x p () ,3 6 4                              G en_T ables( ), 144, 144                        In itD is p , 55, 4 8 7
ExpKind, 85                                  G e t_ E p ilo gu e( ), 553                      I n i t i a l i z e ( ) , for global value
Exp_Kind( ), 85, 418                         G et_ P rologu e( ), 553                                   numbering, 353, 354
extal( ), 304                                G et_ Sy m _ A ttr(), 4 8 48, 59                 I n i t i a l i z e ( ) , for sparse
ExtForm als{ ), 643                          Get.SymbolC ) , 142                                        conditional constant
E x tF o rm a ls (), 646, 646, 648           G lo b a l_ C S E (), 388, 3 8 9                           propagation, 364, 3 6 6
ExtVocab, 142                                G lo b al_ C S E _ P o s(), 3 9 2 -3 9 3 , 392   in_param ( ) , 614, 617
                                             Global_Value_Num ber( ), 351,                    i n s e r t _ a f t e r ( ), 93
                                                     3 5 2 -3 5 3 , 353, 355                  in s e r t _ b e f o r e ( ), 93
             F
                                             globals, 304                                     i n s e r t . b l o c k ( ) , 94, 94
F iA,Bik/ek)( )> 239-240, 240                GloSymtab, 59, 60                                I n s e r t _ E x i t s ( ) , 453
F a l l .Through ( ), 585                    GM0D( ), 630                                     in s e r t .p r e h e a d e r ( ) , 403
F b () ,2 3 1                                G M O D (), 620, 622                             In se r t_ S y m () , 48, 48
F n /e i ), 239                              GMOD.Search( ) , 631                             I n s t , array of intermediate-code
FC( ) ,2 4 0                                 go to , 83, 89                                             instructions, 84, 552, 552
F(C,Bik/ek)( )> 240                          g o to ad d r, 89                                I n s t ( ) , in instruction scheduling,
fields ( ), 304                                                                                         539
F in a l_ V a lu e (), 452                                 H                                  I n s t ( ) , in interprocedural control-
                                                                                                        and data-flow analysis, 612,
F in d _ IV s(), 4 30-431, 430
Find.Opcode( ), 62                           Hash, 764                                                  616, 621
F in d .S o u r c e s( ) , 388               hash( ), 762                                     In stIn v a r ( ) , 398
Find_Symreg( ), 494                          Hash( ) ,3 4 4 , 345                             I n s t r u c t io n , 82
Find_Sym_Tab( ) , 62                         HashSeq, 344, 3 45                               I n s t .R V O , 271, 272
First, 147                                   Has.Left( ), 85                                  I n s t s ( ) , 558, 558
f i r s t , 760                              Heuristics( ) , 539                              In terC od e, 142
Fjteri )? 240                                HIRExpKind, 8 8                                  I n t e r f e r e ( ) , 496
F ix _ S y n t_ B lo ck s( ), 155-157,       HIR_Exp_Kind( ), 86, 8 8                         In tp r _ C o n st_ P ro p (), 6 3 8 -6 3 9
          156-157                            HIR_Has_Left( ), 86, 88                          In t_ to _ R e g ( ), 492, 494
Flatten( ) , 675, 676                        HIRInst, 81, 85, 87                              In varO rder, 398
FlowFcn, 247, 248                            HIRKind, 8 8                                     In v e rt ( ), 453
FlowWL, 364, 365                             HIROpdKind, 8 8                                  I n v e r t _ N o n lo c a l_ A lia s e s (),
Follow( ) , 147                              Hoist_Exps( ) ,4 1 9                                       6 4 6 -6 4 7 , 648
824                       Index of Mathematical Formulas, ic a n Procedures, and Data Structures


IROper, 81                                        Lf , 235, 235                                     MIRKind, 85
I S O L in () ,4 1 3 , 413                        L i n k O , 1 SS, 189                             MIR_to_SymLIR ( ), 486, 492, 493
I S O L o u t ( ) ,4 1 3 , 413                    LIRExpKind, 90                                    M OD(), 619,619
Item , 142                                        LIR_Exp_Kind( ) , 8 6 -8 7 , 9 0                  Modify_Code( ), 488, 506, 5 0 8
Ite m S e t, 1 4 4 , 145                          LIR _H as_Lef t ( ) , 8 6 -8 7 , 9 0 , 91         m odsp( )> 305
I V _ P a t t e r n ( ) , 431                     L I R I n s t, 81                                 M 0D _w ith_A liases( ) , 651, 654
IV reco rd , 4 3 0 , 431                          LIRKind, 90                                       MOP, 227
I Vs, 4 3 0 , 431                                 LIROpdKind, 90                                    More_Syms( ), 4 8 , 48
                                                  LIROperand, 81                                    Move_Cond( ) , 572
                                                  l i s t e x p , 85                                Move_Cond_Applic( ), 572
               j                                                                                    Move_Invar( ) , 4 0 3 , 4 0 4
                                                  l i s t r e c d , 4 8 7 ,4 9 6
J O , 6 3 7 , 637                                 L iv e _ A t( ) , 4 9 6                           Move_0per( ) , 572
J s u p p o r t C ) , 6 3 7 , 637                 L iv e _ o n _ E x it ( ) , 4 5 1 -4 5 2          Move_0per_Applic( ) , 572
                                                  L L ( ),1 9 6                                     Move_Window( ) , 553
               K                                  LLend ( ) , 196                                   Mul_IV(), 4 3 2
                                                  L M O D ( ), 620                                  m vcost, 4 8 4
K IL L ()                                         loadmem, 89
    in copy p ropagation , 3 5 8                  L o c a l_ C o p y _ P ro p () , 3 5 7 -3 5 8                      N
    in global com m on-subexpression              L o c a l_ C S E () , 3 8 0 -3 8 1 , 380
         elim ination, 385, 3 8 6                 Locate_Sym ( ) , 4 8 , 48, 59                     Nat_Loop( ) , 191, 192
    in very busy expressions                      L o o k ah ead ( ) , 143                          nblocks, 92, 92, 3 5 6
         analysis, 4 1 7                          L o op_C on st( ) , 430                           NC_Domin( ) , 211
K i l l{ ), 635, 636                              L o o p _ C t_ In st ( ) , 553                    Ndf s ( ) , 186, 189
K 1 L L P (), 3 9 0                               L o w L in k () , 195, 196, 6 3 0                 nested( ) , 6 20
                                                  L V in (), 4 4 6                                  netsave, 4 8 4
                                                  L V o u t(), 4 4 6                                new_label( ) , 560
               L
                                                                                                    New_Sym_Tab( ) , 4 7 , 4 7
L , 2 2 3 - 2 2 4 , 2 2 3 , 224                                                                     new_tmp(), 3 4 6 ,4 5 3 ,5 6 0
                                                                 M
l a b e l , 83, 89                                                                                  Next (), 142
L a b e l( )                                      Make_Webs ( ) , 4 8 6 - 4 8 7 , 4 9 0 - 4 9 1 ,   next (), 760
     in basic-block scheduling, 5 4 0                    490, 492                                   NextDfn, 195, 6 3 0
     in dom inator com putation, 186,             M a r k _ A lia s _ P a ir s ( ) , 6 5 0 , 652    Next_Sym(), 4 8 , 48
         189                                      M ark_B lock( ) , 3 9 9 , 4 0 0                   nil, 3 0 4
L a b e le d E d g e , 611                        M ark_Ivar ( ) , 3 9 8 -3 9 9 , 398               nil, 2 7 , 35
L a s t, 147                                      m atch ( ) , 649                                  ninsts, 92, 92, 3 5 6
l a s t ( ) , 760                                 M atch_Exp( ) , 344                               NLabelO, 351, 3 5 2
L a tC e lK ), 364, 365                           M axC ycles, 2 7 1 , 2 7 2                        noexp, 85
L A T E in (), 4 1 2 , 41 2                       maxhash, 3 4 5                                    N o n l o c a l _ A li a s e s ( ) , 6 4 3 -6 4 4 ,
L a t e n c y ( ) , 2 7 1 , 2 7 1 , 2 7 2 , 539   m a x i ( ) , 673                                          6 4 5 ,6 4 6 , 648
L a t _ E v a l(),3 6 4                           M a x S ta te N o ,144                            N o n lo c a ls, 630, 6 4 8
LBlock, 92, 92, 5 5 8 , 558                       MCands, 538                                       N o n lo c a ls(), 620
Idcost, 4 8 4                                     M E C _E ntries( ) , 211                          N o n lo c a ls ( ) , 644
LdOp, 60                                          Member ( ) , 674                                  N on term in al, 142, 147
LdStT ype, 60                                     m em p (), 303                                    N o _ P a th () , 581
L e a f, 53 9                                     MFP, 2 2 7                                        N o_R each_D efs( ), 431
L eft, 147                                        MGrammar, 144                                     n p a r a m s () , 6 1 4 , 616, 623, 634
l e f t ( ) , 673                                 m ig r a te ( ) , 573                             n r e g s , 4 8 7 , 4 9 2 , 496
L eft_C h ild (), 147                             M in _C olor( ), 506                              N to B O , 3 5 1 , 3 5 2
L e f t _ F i r s t ( ) , 147                     M in im ize_Im p rop er( ), 210                   n u m in sts{), 620
l e f t m o s t ( ) , 673                         M in S ta ll, 5 5 2 , 553                         n u m in sts(),6 1 0
L e v e l ( ) , 628, 629, 630                     M IR Inst, 81                                     nwebs, 4 8 7 , 4 9 2 , 496
                    Index of Mathematical Formulas, ican Procedures, and Data Structures                                      825


            O                             P r o c e s s _ A f t e r ( ) , 178            r e g b in , 89
                                          P r o c e s s_ B e fo r e ( ), 178             r e g b i n i f , 89
OpdKind, 85                               P r o c e s s _ C a l l ( ) , 612, 614-615,    r e g b in t r a p , 89
opdrecd, 487 ,4 9 2                              618                                     R e g _ C h ar(), 59
Operand, 81                               P ro c e ss_ In st( )                          regcon d, 89
O PT (), 413                                  in building call graph with                r e g e l t , 89
Order, 181                                        procedure-value variables,             Region_N o( ) , 247
o u t(), 231, 231, 234, 234, 245,                 612, 613-614                           RegionType, 205
       246, 247                               in global value numbering,                 R e g is t e r , S I, 82
out_param( ), 614, 617                            345-346                                R egister_R en am e( ) , 565-566,
O u tsid e_ In (), 650                    P r o c e s s_ S u c c _ A fte r( ) , 178            566
ovr, 308                                  P r o c e s s _ S u c c _ B e fo r e (), 178   R egs, 564, 565, 566
oi/r(), 308                               ProcName, 92, 92                               R egsL iveEn tryC ), 564, 566
O v r(), 654, 655, 656                    P r o c _ P o s i t io n ( ), 673, 674         R e gsL iv e E x itC ) , 564, 566
o^rp(), 304                               ProcSeq, 673, 674                              R egsU sedC ) , 5 6 4 ,5 6 6
                                          p r o c _ v a r ( ) , 614, 616                 R e g _ t o _ I n t ( ), 498
            P                             P r o l, 552                                   Reg_to_Sym( ), 60, 60, 61
                                          Prop_M arks(), 650, 652-653                    RegType, 87
p air_m atch (), 649                      P R SV (), 220, 220                            Reg - Type ( )>
par am, 614                               Prune( ), 154                                  regun, 89
p aram (), 617, 634                       Prune_Graph( ), 488, 505, 505                  re g u n if, 89
Parent{), 147                             P,(A, £/), 245                                 regun trap, 89
Parent ( ) , 186, 189                     Ptr( ), 30S, 654, 655, 656                     re g v a l, 89
P a r s ( ),6 3 8 -6 3 9                  ptrP( ), 304                                   r e g v a l if , 89
p a sse d ( )                             PVBinds, 612, 615                              re g v a ltra p , 89
    in interprocedural alias analysis,    PVCalls, 612, 615                              R e m a te r ia liz e (), 503
       643                                PVVals, 612, 615                               Remove ( ) , in basic-block value
    in interprocedural side-effect        PVVs, 612, 615                                          numbering, 344, 347
       analysis, 623                                                                     Remove ( ) , in procedure
Path(), 227                                                                                       positioning, 674, 676
P a t h (), 210
                                                         R
                                                                                         Remove_IVs_LFTR( ), 450-453
P(Bik/ek, Bii/ei), 239-240, 245           R O , 637, 637, 641                            Renumber( ) , 3 8 0
P C lassC ), 544                          RANTin( ), 473, 474                            R ep lace( )
pdom, 182                                 RANTout( ), 473, 474                                in Graham-Glanville code­
Perc_Schedule_l ( ) , 572, 572            RAVin( ), 473, 474                                      generator generation,
Perform _Bin(), 330                       RAVout( ), 473, 474                                     154
Perform_Un(), 330                         RBMOD ( ), 624, 624                                 in structural control-flow
P ip elin e_ S c h ed u le (), 557-558,   RBM0D( ), 626                                           analysis, 210, 210
       558                                RCH in(), 219, 221, 222, 223                   R eplace_C opy( ), 358
Post, ISO, 205                            RCHout, 221,221                                re p la c e _ o p e r a n d s ( ), 565
PostOrdC), 53S-539                        Reach( ) , 154, 418                            r e p l a c e . r e s u l t ( ), 565
P ost_0rd er( )                           Reach_Defs_In( ), 400                          R e p lac e _ U se s( ), 450
    in computing dominance                Reach_Defs_0ut( ), 400                         R e s S e t( ), 271
       frontiers, 254                     ReachUnder, 205                                ResVec, 272
    in instruction scheduling, 539        R e a l ( ), 503                               RetReg, 4 8 7 ,4 9 2
Pp, 240                                   R eal_ R eg(), 4 8 7 , 506                     r e tu r n , 84, 90
Pre, ISO, 205                             re c e iv e , 83                               r e t v a l , 84, 90
PreCtr, 205                               R E D N {), 413                                r e v e r s e ( ), 673
P red O , 92, 92, 189                     Reduce ( ), 207, 209                           Right, 147
Pred(), 175                               re/X), 304                                     r i g h t ( ), 673
pretu rn s ( ) , 612, 617                 REF( ), 619, 619                               R i g h t _ F ir s t ( ), 147
p roc_const( ), 614, 616                  refpi), 304                                    r ig h t m o s t ( ) , 673
826                  Index of Mathematical Formulas, ican Procedures, and Data Structures

R M O D (), 620, 626                       S tru c tT y p e , 205, 205                          in interprocedural data-flow
rmvadj, 496                                S t r u c t u r a l _ A n a l y s i s ( ), 205,          analysis, 619, 619
RootOps, 147                                       206-207                                   U se(), 635, 636
Roots, 273, 540                            S tru c tu r e s, 205, 205                        U s e s ( ), 565
Round_Abs_Up(), 55, 57                     s t r u n if , 87                                 usesave, 484
RSTR{ ), 474                               s t r v a l i f , 87                              usesp(), 305
Rsupport ( ), 637                          S u b s t ( ), 158                                usewt, 501
Rule, 142                                  S u c c O , 92, 92, 189,5 3 9                     UseWt, 487, 501
R U SE (), 473                             Su cc{), 175
                                           S u cce sso rs ( ) , 145, 145                                     V
             S                             Symbol, 47, 81, 487
                                           Symreg, 487                                       v a la s g n , 83
Sam e(), 674                               SymTab, 47                                        v a l i f , 83
SAVE( ), 474                               Sy m _to_R eg( ), 59, 59, 61                      v a l t r a p , 83
Sched, 538, 552, 553, 558                  Sy m _to _R eg_F orce( ), 59, 59                  ValType, 363
SchedulableC ), 552                        SymType, 60                                       V alue, 48
Sch ed ule( ) , 538-539,                                                                     Value_Number( ),
         540-541                                           T                                         345, 345
Sdno, 186, 189                                                                               Var, 81, 81
sdom , 182                                 T a il_ R e c u r _ E lim (), 464                 V ars( ), 646
sequen ce, 84, 90                          T erm in al, 142                                  Vars_Used( ), 593
S e t _ L e v e ls ( ), 629, 630           Tioop, 698-699                                    VBEin(), 417, 417
Set_Sym _A ttr( ), 48, 48                  T op_Sort ( ) , 646                               V BEout{), 417, 417
S h allo w e r ( ), 644                    Tpref 9 673, 699                                  V i s i t ( ) , 180
S h o rt_ C o n st( ), 59                  tpref, 698-699                                    V i s i t _ I n s t ( ), 364, 367
S i z e ( ), 186, 189                      t r a n ( ) ,8 7                                  V is it _ P h i( ), 364, 367
S iz e L im it, 558                        TR A N Sloc(), 408, 410                           Vocab, 142, 145
S p a rse _ C o n d _ C o n st(), 365      tuse, 698-699                                     VocabSeq, 142
s p c o s t , 496, 501                     type, 84, 90
S P _ S c h e d u le (), 553               t y p e ( ), 60                                                   W
SRdone, 436, 437
SSA SuccC), 364, 365                                      U                                  webrecord, 487, 490
SSAWL, 364, 365                                                                              weight ( ) , 673, 674
S t a l l , 552, 553                       UdDu, 251, 487, 490, 594                          w idtb(), 523
sta r{), 303                               UdDuChain, 251, 487, 490, 594                     Window, 552, 553
S t a t e ( ) , 558                        Uexpy 387                                         Window_Schedule( ), 552,
S t a t ic L i n k O f f s e t , 59, 60    U ln st, 561                                            552-553
stcost, 484                                unasgn, 83                                        W o r k l i s t _ I t e r a t e ( ), 232,
stm t{), 303                               unexp, 85                                               232
StOp, 60                                   u n if, 83
stormem, 89                                UniformC), 145, 146, 147                                          Y
S t r a ig h t e n ( ) , 584, 584-585      Unify ( ) , 572
S t r a t i f y ( ) , 628, 629-630         U nify_A pplic( ), 572                            yabe (“ Yet another back end” ),
s t r b i n i f , 87                       U n ro ll( ) , 558, 559-560,                           709-710
S tre n g th _ R e d u c e ( ), 436-437,          561
         437-438                           untrap, 83                                                        Z
Strong_Components( ), 194, 195             USE( )
StructN odes, 205, 205                        in live variables analysis,                    Z, 225
S tru ctO f, 205, 205                             445
                                                                                              Subject Index




            Symbols                        I I (comment delimiter), in ican ,        {...} (enumerated type delimiters),
                                                 21                                        in ican , 23, 26, 29
Ox, begins hexadecimal number, in          < -(...) (conditional assignment          = (equal to operator), in h ir , m ir ,
        h ir , m ir , and lir , 74, 76            operator), in h ir , m ir , and          and l ir , 74
+ (addition operator), in ican , 27,              lir , 74, 75                       = (equal to operator), in ican , 27,
        29                                  <$c, control-dependence operator,              28, 29, 30
+ (addition operator), in h ir , m ir ,            267-268                           3 (existential quantifier), in ican ,
        and lir , 74                       C (cross-edge label), in depth-first           27,28
| (alternation operator), in xbn f                 presentation of flowgraph,        E (exponent delimiter), in h ir , m ir ,
        notation, 19, 20                           178                                    and l ir , 74
 8 a , antidependence operator, 268        D, ends double-precision floating­        E (exponent delimiter), in ican , 28,
± (arbitrary distance), in direction               point number in h ir , m ir ,          29
        vectors, 278                               and lir , 74                      t (exponentiation operator), in
* (arbitrary distance), in direction       => (defined to be operator), in                ican , 27, 29
        vectors, 278                               machine grammars, 140             * . (field indirection operator), in
?, arbitrary relational operator,          — ► (defined to be operator), in                 h ir , m ir , and lir , 74
      449, 456                                     x bn f notation, 19               . (field selection operator), in h ir ,
[...] (array constant delimiters), in      (...), dependence vector delimiters,             m ir , and l ir , 74, 79
      ican , 24, 27, 30                            277, 278                          . (field selection operator), in ican ,
<- (assignment operator), in h ir ,             (derives operator), in machine              27, 34
      m ir , and lir , 73, 74, 79, 80              grammars, 147                     <$f, flow-dependence operator,
:= (assignment operator), in ican ,        (...), direction vector delimiters,              268
      24, 36, 37                                   277-278                           F (forward-edge label), in
B (back-edge label), in depth-first        (...), distance vector delimiters, 278           depth-first presentation of
     presentation of flowgraph,            / (division operator), in h ir , m ir ,          flowgraph, 178
        178                                        and lir , 74                      o, function composition, 235
B (binding graph), in                      / (division operator), in ican , 27,      —> (function type constructor), in
       interprocedural analysis,                   29                                       ican , 23, 26, 28, 34
       623-627, 643-646                    / , does not divide operator, 281         > (greater than operator), in h ir ,
°/«r (carriage return character), in                  edge in directed graph,              m ir , and lir , 74, 75
        ican , 29                                  175                               > (greater than operator), in ican ,
 '...' (character delimiters), in ican ,   [] (empty sequence value), in ican ,           27, 29
       2 8 ,2 9                                 24, 27, 32                           >= (greater than or equal to
 "..." (character string delimiters),      0 (empty set value), in ican , 24,             operator), in h ir , m ir , and
        in ican , 32                            27,31                                      l ir , 74, 75
 I | (comment delimiter), in h ir ,        € (empty string), in grammars, 19,        ^ (greater than or equal to
        m ir , lir , 76                         140                                        operator), in ican , 27, 29



                                                                                                                        827
828                 Subject Index

(...) (grouping operator), in xbnf        € (member of set operator), in             + (positive distance), in direction
        notation, 19                             ican , 27, 28, 31, 34                       vectors, 278
00 (infinite value), in ican , 24, 28,    7, (modulo operator), in ican , 27,        <, precedes-in-execution-order
        29                                       29                                          operator, 267, 275
 5‘, input-dependence operator, 268       * (multiplication operator), in hir ,      7o" (quotation mark character), in
* (Kleene closure operator, unary                mir , and lir , 74, 75                       ican , 29
        postfix), applied to functions,   * (multiplication operator), in            <...> (record constant delimiters),
        235                                       ican , 27, 29                               in ican , 27, 33
 : (label separator), in hir , m ir ,     - (negation operator, unary), in           {...} (record type constructor), in
        and lir , 74, 75, 79, 80                 hir , m ir , and lir , 74, 75                ican , 23, 26, 33
 : (label separator), in ican , 37        - (negation operator, unary), in           ♦ (select from set operator, unary),
_L, lattice bottom value, 223                    ican , 27, 29                               in ican , 24, 27, 31
-l (lattice bottom value), in ican ,      > (negative distance), in direction        tx3 (separated list operator), in xbnf
        22 5 ,3 6 4                              vectors, 278                                notation, 19, 2 0
□, lattice greater than operator,         - (negative distance), in direction        © (sequence concatenation
        225                                      vectors, 278                                operator), in ican , 24, 27, 32
5 , lattice greater than or equal to      + (non-empty closure operator,              [...] (sequence constant delimiters),
        operator, 225                            unary postfix), applied to                  in ican , 24, 27, 32
u, lattice join operator, 223                    functions, 235                      © (sequence member deletion
C, lattice less than operator, 225         != (not equal to operator), in hir ,              operator), in ican , 24, 27, 32
c (lattice less than operator), in               m ir , and lir , 74, 75             i   (sequence member selection
        ican , 639                        * (not equal to operator), in ican ,               operator), in ican , 27, 32
c , lattice less than or equal to                27, 28, 29, 30                      { ...} (set constant delimiters), in
        operator, 225                     £ (not member of set operator), in                 ican , 27, 31
n, lattice meet operator, 223                    ican , 27, 31                       n (set intersection operator), in
n (lattice meet operator), in ican ,      + (one or more copies operator,                     ican , 27, 31
       232, 367, 639                             unary postfix), in xbnf             u (set union operator), in ican , 27,
T , lattice top value, 223                       notation, 19, 2 0                           31
t (lattice top value), in ican , 225,     [...] (optional operator), in xbnf         7o' (single quotation mark
       232, 364                                  notation, 19, 2 0                           character), in ican , 29
< (less than operator), in hir , m ir ,   8  °, output-dependence operator,           I... I (size operator), in ican , 24,
       and lir , 74                              268                                         27, 36
< (less than operator), in ican , 27,     n (pair binding graph), in                 7«f /, sparc floating-point register /,
       29                                        interprocedural alias analysis,             748
<= (less than or equal to operator),             643, 649-653                        7«g/, sparc integer general register
        in h ir , m ir , and lir , 74     %fr/, pa-risc floating-point register              /, 748
^ (less than or equal to operator),              /, 754                              7oi/, sparc integer in register /, 748
       in ican , 27, 29                   7,fr/L, pa-risc floating-point             7*1 /, sparc integer local register /,
-<, lexicographically less than                  register /, left part, 754                  748
       operator, 275                      %fr/R, pa-risc floating-point              7oO/, sparc integer out register /,
     lexicographically less than or              register /, right part, 754                 748
       equal to operator, 276             7,17, pa-risc integer register /, 754                                   i,
                                                                                     7.17, sparc integer register 748
t (load operator, unary), in              7*7o (percent character), in ican , 29     <-sp (speculative load operator),
       machine grammars, 139              ^-function, static single assignment               extension to lir , 547, 548
& (logical and operator), in ican ,              form, 252, 253                       ; (statement separator), in ican ,
       27, 28                             * (pointer indirection operator,                   2 1 ,3 7
 ! (logical not operator, unary), in             unary), in hir , m ir , and lir ,   <- (store operator), in machine
        hir , m ir , and lir , 74, 75            74, 75, 79                                  grammars, 139
 ! (logical not operator, unary), in      * (position indicator), in LR(1)            • • (subscript range operator), in
       ican , 27, 28                             items, 144                                  ican , 26, 30
V (logical or operator), in ican , 27,    < (positive distance), in direction        - (subtraction operator), in hir ,
       28                                        vectors, 278                                mir , and lir , 74, 75
                     Subject Index                                                                                 829


- (subtraction o p erato r), in ic a n ,     addressing expressions,               algorithms. See also specific types
       27, 29                                      algebraic simplification              o f analyses and optimizations
<...> (tuple constant delimiters), in              and reassociation, 334-341         binding graph construction,
       ICAN, 27                              addressing method, symbol-table             625, 643, 645
@(tuple element selection operator),               variables, 54-55                   call graph nesting levels,
      in ic a n , 24, 27, 33                 adjacency-list representation for           629-630
x (tuple type constructor), in ic a n ,            interference graphs, 487,          call-graph construction,
      23, 26, 28, 33                               496-497, 498, 499, 530                609-611
= (type definition operator), in                examples, 498, 514, 516, 517,         call-graph construction with
      ic a n , 25, 26, 35                          520                                   procedure-valued variables,
u (union type co n stru ctor), in ic a n ,   adjacency-matrix representation             612-618
      23, 26, 28, 34                               for interference graphs, 487,      code hoisting, 418-419
V (universal quantifier), in ic a n ,              495-496, 497, 530                  combining alias information
       27, 28                                   examples, 496, 513-516, 519              with alias-free version, 651,
<$wl (write-live dependence),                affix-grammar-based code­                   654
       571                                         generator generators,              computing aliases for nonlocal
= (zero distance), in direction                     159-160                              variables, 643-646, 647
       vectors, 278                          aggregation of global references,        computing formal-parameter
* (zero or m ore co pies operator,                 663                                   alias information, 650-651,
      unary p ostfix), in x b n f               importance of, 664                       653
      notation , 19, 20                         order of optimizations, 665-666       constant folding, 330
                                             Aho, Alfred V., 160, 165, 351            dead-code elimination, 592-593,
            A                                algebraic simplifications and               596
                                                   reassociation, 333-343             dependence DAG construction,
ABI. See Application Binary                     of addressing expressions,               273-274
      Interface (ABI) standards                    334-341                            depth-first search for dominator
abstract flowgraphs, 198                        algebraic simplifications,               computation, 187
abstract nodes, 198                                defined, 333                       dominator computation using
abstract syntax tree, 70-71                     for binary operators, 333                Dom_Comp, 182
accumulator-variable expansion,                 for bit-field types, 333              dominator computation using
      562-564                                   for Booleans, 333                        Domin_Fast, 186-187
Action/Next tables, Graham-                     canonicalization, 335-336             dynamic programming
      Glanville code generator,                 of floating-point expressions,           algorithms, 163-165
      149-150, 158                                 342-343                            global common-subexpression
acyclic control structures                      order of optimizations, 333,             elimination, 388-390,
   backward structural data-flow                   372                                   391-394
      analysis, 245, 246                        overview, 371                         GM O D ( ), 630-631
   forward structural data-flow                 reassociation, defined, 333           Graham-Glanville code­
      analysis, 239-240                         for relational operators,                generation algorithm,
   structural control-flow analysis,               333-334                               142-143
      202-204, 207-208                          strength reductions, 334              greedy or maximal munch,
acyclic test, 284                               tree transformations, 337-341            141
Ada                                             for unary operators, 333              IM OD+ ( ), 628
   call by value-result in, 117                 using commutativity and               instruction scheduling, 540-541
   enumerated value                                associativity, 334                 interprocedural constant
      representation, 107                    ALGOL 60                                    propagation, 637-639
   scoping issues, 52                          call by name in, 118                   intraprocedural code
   unnecessary bounds-checking                 call by value in, 117                     positioning, 678-681
      elimination for, 454-457                 labels as arguments, 118-119           inverting nonlocal alias function,
addition operator (+)                        ALGOL 68                                    646-647, 648
   in h i r , m ir , and l ir , 74             call by reference in, 118              label evaluation for dominator
   in ic a n , 27, 29                          call by value in, 117                     computation, 188
830                   Subject Index

algorithms (cont.)                                flow-insensitive must                     order of optimizations, 705
   linking for dominator                              information, 295                      peephole optimizations, 729,
      computation, 188                            flow-sensitive may information,               730
   local common-subexpression                         295-296                               register allocation, 483, 485
      elimination, 380-381                         flow-sensitive must information,      alternation operator (|), in x b n f
   local copy propagation,                            296                                       notation, 19, 20
      356-358                                      flow-sensitive vs. flow-insensitive   ancestor, 185
  lo o p -in v arian t co d e m otion ,               information, 294-295, 315          anticipatable registers, in shrink
      397-400, 403-404                            granularity of information, 297,              wrapping, 473
  m ark in g p aram eter p airs in p air              315                                anticipatable values, 410-411
       bin din g g ra p h , 650, 652-653          importance of, 293-294,                antidependence
  m o s t pipelin in g algorith m , 567               314-315                               definition, 268
  n atu ral lo o p , 192                           interprocedural, 641-656                 operator (5a), 268
  p a ir bin din g grap h co n stru ction ,       may vs. must information, 294,         Application Binary Interface (ABI)
      649-650                                         315                                       standards, 105, 134
  p artitio n in g for g lo b a l value           sources of aliases, 296-297            arbitrary distance, in direction
      n u m bering, 351-355                   alias gatherer, 203-207                           vectors
  p ath -com p ression fo r d o m in ato r        aliases in C, 305-307                     ± , 278
     co m p u ta tio n , 187                      described, 315                            * , 278
  perco latio n sch ed ulin g, 572                examples of aliasing concepts,         arbitrary relational operator (?),
  proced u re so rtin g , 673-676                     303                                       449, 456
  RBM OD( ) on bin din g g rap h ,                nontermination, 304                    architectures
      626                                         program points, 303                       Alpha, 726
   sparse conditional constant                    sources of aliases, 296-297               branch architectures, 533
      propagation, 364-366                    alias propagator, 307-314                     Intel 386 family, 734-735
   strength reduction, 436-438                     for C code, 309-314                      loop unrolling and, 560-561,
   strongly connected components,                 described, 296, 315                           562
       195                                        examples of aliasing concepts,            pipeline architectures, 531,
   structural control-flow analysis,                  303                                       532-533
      205-206                                 Allen, Francis E., 449, 459                   po w er and PowerPC, 716-717
   unreachable-code elimination,              a l l o c a ( ), pointers and, 113            sp a r c , 707-708
      580-581                                 Alpern, Bowen, 348, 355                    arguments. See also parameter­
   unroll-and-compact software                Alpha architecture, 726                           passing (run-time);
      pipelining, 557-558                     Alpha compilers, 726-733                          parameters
   window scheduling, 552-553                     alias analysis, 729                       defined, 117
   worklist for iterative data-flow               assembly code examples,                   described, 111
      analysis, 232-233                               730-733                            array constant delimiters ([...]), in
alias analysis, 293-317. See also                 assembly language, 750-752                    ic a n , 24, 27, 30
      interprocedural alias analysis              CIL code, 727-728                      a rra y . . .o f, (array type
   alias gatherer, 203-207, 315                   code generator, 730                           constructor), in ic a n ,
   alias propagator, 307-314, 315                 data prefetching, 698                         23
   aliases in C, 300-301, 305-306                 data-flow analysis, 729                array types ( ic a n )
   aliases in Fortran 77, 298-299                 development, 726-727                      binary o p erato rs, 30
   aliases in Fortran 90, 301-302,                EIL code, 727, 728, 730                   co n stan ts, 30, 33
      305                                         global optimizations, 729                 overview, 30
   aliases in Pascal, 299-300, 304,               inlining, 729                          array s
      305                                         instruction prefetching, 672              co lu m n -m ajor order, 107
   Alpha compilers, 729                           languages supported, 727                  in copy p ro p ag atio n , 356
   cases, 295-296                                 loop inversion, 729                       data-flow an aly sis, 258-259
   described, 293                                 mixed model of optimization in,           function represen tation, 764
   flow-insensitive may                               9                                     h ir represen tation, 68-69
      information, 295                            optimization levels, 728-729              last-w rite trees, 259
                        Subject Index                                                                                     831


    l ir representation, 68-69                           See also Graham-Glanville              scheduling; cross-block
    m ir representation, 68-69                           code-generator generator               scheduling
     row-major order, 107                             Graham-Glanville code­                in copy propagation, 356
    run-time representation,                             generator generator, 139-158       correspondence between bit-
          107-108                                     issues in generating code,                vector positions, definitions,
    scalar replacement of array                          137-138                                and basic blocks, 219, 220
          elements, 682-687                           overview, 6, 137-139                  data-flow analysis and, 218
    separable references, 282                         semantics-directed parsing,           dependence DAGs, 269-274
    sparse set representation,                           159- 160                           extended, 175-177, 3 6 1 ,5 6 5
          762-763                                     software resources, 769-770           identifying, 173-174
    storage binding, 58                               syntax-directed technique,            intraprocedural code
    unnecessary bounds-checking                          139-158                                positioning, 677-681
          elimination, 454                           tree pattern matching and              local common-subexpression
    weakly separable references,                         dynamic programming,                   elimination, 382-384
          282, 283                                       160- 165                           local copy propagation for
a s c ii , DEC VAX support, 106                    automatic inlining. See procedure            extended basic blocks, 361
assembly code examples                                   integration                        placement in instruction cache,
    Alpha compiler, 730-733                        automatic storage class, 44                  676-677
    Pentiums, 741-744                              automating data-flow analyzer            predecessor, 175, 484
    po w er compiler, 723-725                            construction, 259-261              reverse extended, 175
    spa r c compilers, 713-716                     automating instruction-scheduler         successor, 175, 484
assembly languages, 747-755                              generation, 543                    value numbering applied to,
    Alpha, 750-752                                 available expressions                        344-348
    Intel 386 family, 752-753                         analysis, 229                      basic induction variables, 426,
    pa -r i s c , 753-755                            global common-subexpression                427
    po w er and PowerPC,                                 elimination, 385-387, 390       basic-block scheduling. See also
          749-750                                     local common-subexpression                instruction scheduling
    relocatable binary form vs.,                         elimination, 379                   balanced scheduling, 545
          138                                      available registers, in shrink           combining with branch
    sp a r c , 747-749                                   wrapping, 473                          scheduling, 573
assignment operator                                                                         described, 531
           in h i r , m i r , and l ir , 73, 74,             B                              filling stall cycles, 535
          79, 80                                                                            list scheduling, 535, 537-543
     :=, in ic a n , 24, 36, 37                    Babbage, Charles, 459                    loop unrolling and, 532
assignment statements ( ic a n ),                  back edges                               order of optimizations,
          overview, 36-38                             in depth-first presentation, 178          574-575
assignments                                           label (B), in depth-first             performance and, 573
    h i r , 79                                           presentation of flowgraph,         register allocation and, 545
     l ir , 80                                            178                               register renaming and, 532
    m ir , 75                                         in natural loops, 191                 trace scheduling, 569-570
associativity, algebraic                           Backus-Naur Form, Extended               variable expansion and, 532
          simplifications using,                         (x b n f ), 19-20               basis, of a class of induction
          334                                      backward data-flow analysis                  variables, 428
attribute-grammar-based code­                         iterative, 229, 235                Bell, Ron, 670, 671
          generator generators,                       live variables analysis, 445-447   Bernstein, David, 521, 548
          159-160                                     structural data-flow analysis,     bidirectional data-flow analysis,
attributes of symbols in symbol                          244-247                                229
          tables, 45-47                            balanced binary trees, 48, 761, 763   bin-packing, register allocation
    list of, 46                                    balanced scheduling, 545                     and, 484-485, 730
Auslander, Marc, 804                               Ball, Thomas, 598                     binary operators
automatic generation of code                       Banerjee, Utpal, 289, 738                algebraic simplifications, 333
          generators, 137-167.                     basic blocks. See also basic-block       m i r , 75
832                  Subject Index

binary operators ( i c a n )               bounds checking, 454. See also            local variable declarations, 58
     array types, 30                              unnecessary bounds-checking        pointer aliasing, 294
     boolean types, 28                            elimination                        pointers, 258
     character types, 29                   braces. See curly braces                  tail-recursion elimination in,
     enumerated types, 30                  brackets. See square brackets                 4 6 1 ,4 6 2
     integer types, 29                     Bradlee, David G., 526                    well-behaved loops, 425
     real types, 29                        branch node, 175                      C++
     record types, 34                      branch optimizations, 589-590             call by reference in, 118
     sequence types, 32                       cases, 590                             call by value in, 117
     set types, 31                            described, 580                         name mangling by cfro n t
     tuple types, 33                          detecting branches to branch               preprocessor, 10
     union types, 34                              instructions, 589                  scoping issues, 52
binding graph                                 order of optimizations, 589, 604   caches. See also data-cache
     flow-insensitive interprocedural      branch prediction, 597-599                    optimization; instruction-
          alias analysis, 643, 645            described, 580, 597                        cache optimization
     flow-insensitive side-effect             dynamic methods, 597-598               combined or unified cache, 670
          analysis, 623-627                   heuristics, 598-599                    data-cache impact, 670-671
     pair binding graph, 649-650              importance of, 579, 603                data-cache optimization,
bit-field types, algebraic                    instruction prefetching and, 673           687-700
          simplifications, 333                loop and nonloop branches,             effectiveness, 670
bit vectors                                       598-599                            instruction-cache impact, 672
     correspondence between bit-              order of optimizations, 604            instruction-cache optimization,
          vector positions, definitions,      perfect static predictor, 598              672-682
          and basic blocks, 219, 220          static methods, 598                    stride values, 670
     defined, 218-219                      branch scheduling, 533-535                translation-lookaside buffer
     lattice of, 224, 226                     branch architectures, 533                  (TLB), 670
     linked-list representation vs.,          combining with basic-block         c a ll
          757-759                                 scheduling, 573                    l ir , 80
     sequence representation, 763             described, 533                         MIR, 76
     set operations, 759-760                  filling delay slots, 534-535       call-by-name parameter passing,
     set representation, 759-760              filling stall cycles, 535                  118
b l i s s compilers                           flowchart, 536                     call-by-reference parameter
     for Alpha, 727                           nullification, 534-535                     passing, 117-118
     reducible flowgraphs and, 196            order of optimizations, 574-575    call-by-result parameter passing,
     register allocation, 483, 484,           performance and, 573                       117
          528                              breadth-first order, 181              call by value
block and procedure placement in           breadth-first search, 181                 interprocedural alias analysis
          instruction caches, 676-677      Briggs, Preston, 355, 414, 485,               a n d ,654-656
block schema, 203                                 495, 523, 525, 762                 interprocedural optimization,
blocks, basic. See basic blocks            BURG, 769                                     656, 658
boolean ic a n type                        BURS, 165                                parameter passing, 117
     binary operators, 28                  byte, usage in this book, 16-17       call-by-value-result parameter
     Boolean-valued expressions, 28                                                      passing, 117
    overview, 28                                       C                         call graphs. See also interprocedural
    symbol-table entries, 46                                                             control-flow analysis
Booleans                                   c                                        interprocedural control-flow
    algebraic simplifications, 333             alias propagator, 309-314                 analysis, 609-618
    run-time support, 107                      aliases in, 300-301, 305-307,         interprocedural data-flow
boosting, 548                                     641                                    analysis, 628-631
bottom of lattices, 223                        basic-block boundaries, 174           procedure sorting, 673-674
bottom-up rewriting systems                    call by reference in, 118         Callahan, David, 525, 530, 634,
          ( b u r s ), 165                     call by value in, 117                     637, 694
                     Subject Index                                                                                   833


callee-saved registers, 120            class of induction variables,          common-subexpression
caller-saved registers, 120                   428                                   elimination, 378-396
canonical form for loops, 689          clique, 525                               combining with constant
canonical loop test, 275               clique separators, 525-526                   propagation, 394
canonicalization, 335-336              cloning, procedure, 607-608, 657          combining with copy
capitalization, x b n f notation, 19   closed scopes, 52-54                         propagation, 394-395
Carr, Steve, 694                       Cmelik, Robert, 770, 771                  forward substitution, 395
carriage return character (#/0r), in   coalescing registers. See register        global, 378, 385-395
      ic a n , 29                             coalescing                         local, 378, 379-385, 395
case statem ents ( ic a n )            Cocke, John, 449, 485, 804                order of optimizations, 421
   form, 39                            code generation. See also automatic       overview, 377, 378-379, 420
   internal delimiters, 25                    generation of code generators      reassociation with, 385,
case studies, 705-745                     Alpha compiler, 730                       415-416
   Alpha compiler, 726-733                assembly language vs.                  register use issues, 396
   example programs for,                      relocatable binary form,           repeating, 394-395
      705-707                                 138                                value numbering vs., 343
   IBM XL compilers, 716-725              described, 3                        commutativity, algebraic
   Intel reference compilers for 386      Graham-Glanville code­                    simplifications using,
      family, 734-744                         generator generator, 140-144          334
   spa r c compilers, 707-716             issues, 137-138                     compensation code, in trace
case/switch schema, 203                code hoisting, 417-420                       scheduling, 569
CDGs. See control-dependence              control-flow analysis and, 175      compilation process
      graphs (CDGs)                       example, 418, 420                      high-level intermediate
chain loops, eliminating in               implementation, 418-419                   languages in, 69-70
      Graham-Glanville code               order of optimizations, 421            phases, 2-3
      generator, 152-154                  overview, 377, 417, 420             compilation, separate. See separate
Chaitin, Gregory, 485, 494, 498           very busy expressions, 417                compilation
Chandra, Ashok, 804                    code positioning in cache.             compile-time interprocedural
ch aracter, ic a n type                       See instruction-cache                 register allocation, 662
   binary operators, 29                       optimization                    compiler structure, 1-3
   delimiters ( '...') , 28, 29        code scheduling. See instruction          optimizing compilers, 7-11
   escape sequences, 29                       scheduling                         placement of optimizations,
   overview, 29                        code sharing. See shared objects             11-14
   symbol-table entries, 46            code-generator generators. See         co m piler su ites, 9
character string delimiters ("..."),          automatic generation of code    com piler-specific types ( ic a n ),
      in ic a n , 32                          generators                             overview , 24, 35
character strings, run-time            column-major order for arrays,         co m p ilers, defined, 1 -2
      representation, 108-109                 107                             co m p o sitio n op eratio n (o), in
characters, run-time representation,   combined or unified cache, 670                lattices, 235
      106, 108-109                     comment delimiter ( | | )              compound statements, in ic a n , 25
Chow, Frederick, 473, 524, 662            in HIR, MIR, l ir , 76              computation nodes, 571
CIL code, 727-728                         in ic a n , 21                      concatenation operation, x b n f
circular scheduling, 565               comments                                    notation, 19-20
ciscs                                     ic a n , 21                         condition codes, dependency
   aggregation of global references,      MIR, 76                                  computation and, 269
      663                              COMMON statement (Fortran 77),         conditional assignment operator
   character representation                   aliases and, 298-299                 (< -(...)), in h i r , m i r , and
      supported, 106                   common storage class (Fortran),             l ir , 74, 75
   instruction decomposing, 602               44                              conditional moves
   pipelining, 531                     common subexpressions                    described, 580, 591
   register assignment, 482               defined, 378                          order of optimizations, 604
   register usage, 110                    if simplifications, 586               overview, 591-592
834               Subject Index

congruence of variables, 348-351      constructed types (ican ), 28           structural analysis, 202-214
co-NP-complete problems, 634,           array types, 30, 33                   successors of a node, 175
      637                               function types, 34                    usefulness of, 169-170
conservative optimizations,             record types, 33                   control-flow and low-level
      319-320                           sequence types, 32, 33                    optimizations, 579-605
constant folding, 329-331               set types, 31                         branch optimizations, 580,
   algorithm, 330                       tuple types, 33                           589-590
   for floating-point values,         control dependence                      branch prediction, 580,
      330-331                           defined, 267-268                          597-599, 603
   increasing effectiveness, 331        dependence graphs and,                conditional moves, 580,
   order of optimizations, 331,            268-269                                591- 592
      372                               operator (<$c), 267-268               dead-code elimination, 580,
   overview, 329-330, 371             control trees, 198, 199                     592-      597, 602-603
constant propagation. See also          control-tree based data-flow          described, 322, 579
      sparse conditional constant          analysis, 235-236                  if simplifications, 580, 585-586
      propagation                     control-dependence graphs               loop inversion, 580, 587-588
   combining with common-                  (CDGs), 284-286                    loop simplifications, 580,
      subexpression elimination,      control-dependent nodes of PDGs,            586-587
      394                                  2 8 4 ,2 8 6                       machine idioms and instruction
   induction-variable optimizations   control-flow analysis, 169-216.             combining, 580, 599-602
      and, 426                             See also flowgraphs and            postpass or peephole
   interprocedural, 637-641, 656,          interprocedural control-flow           optimizations, 579, 603-604
      658                                  analysis                           straightening, 579, 583-585
   overview, 362-363                    Alpha compilers, 726                  tail merging or cross jumping,
constant-expression evaluation. See     basic-block identification,               580,590-591
      constant folding                      173- 174                          unreachable-code elimination,
constant-propagation analysis,          branch node, 175                          579, 580-582
      2 3 0,261-262                     breadth-first search, 181             unswitching, 580, 588-589
   interprocedural, 631-647, 656,       depth-first search, 178-179, 180   control-flow path, defined, 218
      665-666                           dominance tree, 171-172            control-tree-based data-flow
constants                               dominator-based approaches,               analysis, 236-251
   global constant-propagation              173                            Cooper, Keith D., 355, 414, 443,
      analysis, 230                     dominators, 171-172, 181-191              469, 620, 637, 642, 664
   hir , m ir , and lir integer         flowgraph construction,            copy propagation, 356-362
      constants, 76                         174- 177                          combining with common-
   for jump and return-jump             Intel compilers, 738                      subexpression elimination,
      functions, 640                    interprocedural, 609-618                  394-395
   interprocedural constant-            interval analysis and control         described, 356
      propagation analysis,                trees, 197-202                     global, 358-362
      6 3 1 -641,656, 665-666           interval-based approaches, 173        local, 356-358, 361
constants (ican )                       join node, 175                        order of optimizations, 372
   array types, 30, 33                  natural loops, 191-193                overview, 356, 371
   function types, 34                   postorder traversal, 180, 181         register coalescing, 487,
   record types, 33                     power and PowerPC compilers,              497-501
   sequence types, 32, 33                  721                             copy-propagation analysis, 230
   set types, 31                        predecessors of a node, 175        Coutant, Deborah, 309
   syntax of generic simple types,      preorder traversal, 179-181        Cray Fortran extensions, 299, 305,
      28                                reducibility, 196-197                     708
   tuple types, 33                      simple example, 169-172            critical edges, 407, 408, 474
constrained Diophantine equations,      sparc compilers, 710               cross-block scheduling, 546-547
      280                               strongly connected components,        described, 531
constraint matrix test, 284                 193-196                           order of optimizations, 574-575
                  Subject Index                                                                             835


    performance and, 573                   size operator ( I I), 36              independent attributes, 229
cross edge, in depth-first                 for symbol-table attributes, 46       Intel compilers, 738
      presentation of flowgraph            syntax of ican definitions,           interprocedural, 619-637
   defined, 178                               25-26                              interprocedural data-flow
   label (C), 178                          tuples (ican ), 33                       information and, 658
cross jumping. See tail merging            unions (ican ), 34                    interval analysis, 249-250
cyclic control structures                  variables, 81                         iterative analysis, 231-235
   backward structural data-flow        data-cache optimization, 687-700.        lattices, 223-226
      analysis, 245-246                       See also memory-hierarchy          lattices of flow functions,
   forward structural data-flow               optimizations                         235-236
      analysis, 240                        data prefetching, 688, 698-700        live variables analysis, 229
   structural control-flow analysis,       data-cache impact, 670-671           overview, 217-218
      202-204, 207-208                     interprocedural arrangement of       partial-redundancy analysis,
                                              data, 689                             230
           D                               locality and tiling, 695-698          power and PowerPC compilers,
                                           loop transformations, 689-695            722
D-cache optimization. See                  matrix multiplication and, 671        program verification, connection
      data-cache optimization              optimizer structure and, 10-11           to, 261-262
DAGs. See Directed Acyclic Graphs          order of optimizations, 701, 702     purpose, 217
      (DAGs)                               overview, 687-689, 701               reaching definitions analysis,
data dependence, 268-269                   scalar vs. memory-oriented               2 1 8 -2 2 3 ,2 2 9
data prefetching, 688, 698-700                optimizations, 700                slotwise analysis, 250-251
   order of optimizations, 702-703      data-flow analysis, 217-266.             sparc compilers, 710
data structure representation,                See also interprocedural          SSA form, 252-258
      757-765                                 data-flow analysis                structural analysis, 236-249
   functions, 764-765                      Alpha compiler, 729                  taxonomy of problems and
   linked-list vs. bit-vector,             approaches to solving problems,          solution methods, 228-231
      757-759                                 230-231                           for type determination and
  sequences, 763                           arrays, structures and pointers,         dependence analysis,
  sets, 759-763                               258-259                               262-263
  trees and DAGs, 763-764                  automating data-flow analyzer        ud-chains, 251
data structures in structural                 construction, 259-261             upwards exposed uses analysis,
      control-flow analysis, 205           available expressions analysis,          229-230
data types. See also type definitions         229                               webs, 251-252
      (ican )                              backward, 229, 244-247             dead instructions, 592
  arrays (ican ), 30                       bidirectional, 229                 dead variables, 445, 592-593
  compiler-specific types (ican ),        conservatism in, 217                dead-code elimination, 592-597
      24, 35                              constant-propagation analysis,        algorithm, 592-593, 596
  constructed types (ican ), 28               230, 261-262                      described, 580, 592
  enumerated types (ican ), 29-30         control-flow path, 218                determining dead code, 592-593
   floating-point numbers, 81             control-tree based, 235-236           ican code, 593-594
   functions (ican ), 34-35               copy-propagation analysis, 230        importance of, 602-603
  generic simple types (ican ), 23,        du-chains, 251                       order of optimizations, 327,
      28-29                                factorial computation example,           603-604
  integers, 81                                261-262                           repetition of, 13-14, 579, 603
  n il value for, 24, 35                  fixed points, 226-227                 unreachable-code elimination
  records (ican ), 33-34                  flow functions, 226-227                   vs., 580
  registers, 82                           for global copy propagation,        debugging, intermediate-code
  run-time representation,                    358-360                               output, 69
      106-109                              forward, 229, 236-244              DEC GEM compilers. See Alpha
  sequences (ican ), 32-33                 in induction-variable                    compilers
  sets (ican ), 31-32                         optimizations, 428              DEC VAX, ascii support, 106
836               Subject Index

declarations (ican ). See also type      structural hazards, 271             Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs),
       definitions (ican )               for window scheduling,                     100-101
   procedure declarations, 23, 24,          551-552, 554, 555                   basic-block dependence DAGs,
       27                             dependence graphs                            269-274
   syntax, 26-27                         described, 268-269                     representation, 764, 765
   variable declarations, 23, 26-27      program-dependence graphs           direction vector
dedicated registers, 120                    (PDGs), 284-286                     defined, 277-278
defined to be operator                dependence relations, 267-269             delimiters ((...)), 277-278
   =>, in machine grammars, 140          antidependence (<$a), 268           distance vector
   — >, in xbnf notation, 19             control dependence (<$c),              defined, 277
degree, in register allocation by           267-268                             delimiters ((...)), 278
       graph coloring, 494               data dependence, 268                   lexicographically positive,
degree < R rule, 488, 503-506            flow or true dependence (5f),             690-691
delay slots, filling, 532, 534-535          268                              distance vector set, 278
delayed expressions in partial-          input dependence (<$'), 268         distributive lattices, 224, 236
       redundancy analysis,              loop-carried, 278                   division operator (/)
       411-412                           loop-independent, 278                  in hir , m ir , and lir , 74
delete-node transformation,              notation, 267-268, 276                 in ican , 27, 29
       571-572                           output dependence (5°), 268         does not divide operator ( / ) , 281
delimiters                               write-live dependence (<$wl), 571   dominance frontiers, 253-256
   between statements (ican ), 21     dependence testing, 279-284               computing for flowgraphs,
   of compound statements (ican ),       constrained Diophantine                   254-256
       25                                   equations, 280                      iterated, 254-256
Delta test, 284                          GCD (greatest common divisor),      dominance tree
dependence, defined, 267                    281-283                             global value numbering for, 355
dependence analysis, 267-291             integer programming, 280               identifying loops, 171-172
   Alpha compilers, 729                  other tests, 283-284                dominators, 181-191
   basic-block dependence DAGs,          separable array references, 282        algorithms, 182, 186-187
       269-274                           weakly separable array                 computing using Dom_Comp(),
   data-flow analysis for, 262-263          references, 282                         182- 184
   dependence relations, 267-269      dependence vector                         computing using Domin_Fast,
   dependence testing, 279-284           defined, 278                               185-191
   dependences between                   delimiters ((...)), 277, 278           disadvantages of, 173
       dynamically allocated             distance vector, set of, 278           immediate dominators,
       objects, 286-288               dependent induction variables,                183- 184, 189-191
   dependences in loops, 274-279            426-427, 429                        label evaluation computation,
   in high-level intermediate         depth-first number, 178                       188
       languages, 71                  depth-first presentation, 178             linking computation, 188
   Intel compilers, 738               depth-first search, 178-179,180           overview, 181-182
   power and PowerPC compilers,          computing dominators, 187              path-compression computation,
       721                               interprocedural data-flow                  187
   program-dependence graphs                analysis, 632                       postdominators, 182
       (PDGs), 284-286                depth-first spanning tree, 178            semidominators, 185
   sparc compilers, 711                  computing, 180                         simple example, 171-172
dependence DAGs, 269-274                 in structural control-flow             strict dominators, 182
   algorithm, 273-274                       analysis, 204                    double-precision floating-point
   constructing, 271-274                 tree edges, 178                           number, ends with D, in hir ,
   edges in, 269                      derives operator ( ^ ) , in machine          mir , and lir , 74
   for lir code, 270-271                    grammars, 147                    double-precision matrix
   list scheduling, 535, 537-543      Deutsch, Alain, 133, 287, 290                multiplication, 671
   nodes in, 269                      Dhamdhere, Dhananjay M ., 250,         du-chains, 251, 486. See also webs
   resource vectors, 271                    407                                 determining dead code, 593
                  Subject Index                                                                                      837


   in SSA form, 252                        sparse conditional constant                       interprocedural side-effect
dynamic branch-prediction                     propagation, 362-371                           analysis, 637
      methods, 597-598                     value numbering, 343-355                  existential quantifier (3), in ican ,
dynamic extent, 45                     ebcdic , IBM System/370 support,                      2 7 ,2 8
dynamic languages, run-time                    106                                   exit blocks of a loop, 403
      support, 131-133                 Ebcioglu, Kemal, 548                          exponent delimiter (E)
dynamic link. See also shared          edge in directed graph (...->...),               in hir , m ir , and lir , 74
      objects                                  175                                      in ican , 28, 29
  described, 110-111, 114              edge splitting, of critical edges,            exponentiation operator (t), in
  global offset table (GOT), 129,             407, 474, 509                                  ican , 27, 29
      130                              effective height, of a lattice, 226           expressions
  procedure linkage table (PLT),       efficiency. See also performance                 algebraic simplification and
      130, 131                             one-pass compilers and, 3, 6                     reassociation of addressing
  semantics of, 127-128                    run-time support and, 4-6                        expressions, 334-341
  transferring control between         Eggers, Susan f., 526, 545                       algebraic simplification of
      shared objects, 129-130          EIL code, 727, 728                                   floating-point expressions,
  transferring control within          elimination methods                                   342-343
      shared objects, 128-129             control-tree based data-flow                  available expressions analysis,
dynamic linker, run-time, 127-128             analysis, 235-236                             229
dynamic programming, 160-165               interval control-flow analysis,              common-subexpression
  algorithms, 163-165                         173, 197-202                                  elimination, 378-396
  described, 160                       empty sequences, in ican                         delayed, 411-412
  optimality principle, 160                defined, 24                                  earliestness, 411
  pattern-matching process,               value ([]), 24, 27, 32                        globally anticipatable values,
      160-164                          empty sets, in ican                                  410-411
  tree-matching automaton, 163,           defined, 24                                   HIR, 79
      164                                 value (0), 24, 2 7 ,3 1                       isolated, 413
  tree-rewriting rules, 160-162        empty string (e), in grammars, 19,               latestness, 412-413
  uniform-register-machine                    140                                       lir , 80
      assumption, 163-165              enum, enumerated type constructor,               locally anticipatable values,
dynamic scoping, 45                           in ican , 23                                  410
dynamically allocated objects,         enumerated type delimiters                       m ir , 84-85
      dependences between,                    ( { . . . } ) , in ican , 23, 26, 29      very busy expressions, 417
      286-288                          enumerated types, run-time                    expressions (ican )
dynamically allocated storage, alias          representation, 107                       Boolean-valued, 28
      gatherer and, 302                enumerated types (ican )                         n i l value in, 35
                                          binary operators, 30                          overview, 23, 28
           E                              overview, 29-30                               syntax, 27
                                          symbol-table entries, 46                   Extended Backus-Naur Form
earliestness of expressions in         epilogue of procedures, 120                          (x b n f ), 19-20
      partial-redundancy analysis,        shrink wrapping and, 472, 473                 syntax of hir instructions,
      411                              equal to operator (=)                                78-79
early optimizations, 329-375              in hir , mir , and lir , 74                   syntax of lir instructions, 79-81
   algebraic simplifications and          in ican , 27, 28, 29, 30                      syntax of mir instructions,
      reassociation, 333-343           EQUIVALENCE statement (Fortran                       73-75
   constant folding, 329-331                  77), aliases and, 298-299                 syntax of mir programs and
   constant-expression evaluation,     escape sequences for character                       program units, 74
      329-331                                 values, 29                             extended basic blocks, 175-177
   copy propagation, 356-362           essential value or instruction, 592              local copy propagation for, 361
   described, 321                      examples in this book, target                    register renaming on, 565
   scalar replacement of aggregates,          machines, 16                           extended formal parameters, 643
      331-333                          exception handling, in                        extended GCD test, 283
838                 Subject Index

extent of variables, 44                     flow-insensitive interprocedural         dominance frontier
   dynamic extent, 45                          side-effect analysis, 619-633            computation, 254, 255
extern storage class, 44                    flow-sensitive interprocedural           dominator tree for, 257
                                               alias analysis, 642                   extended basic blocks, 175-177
            F                               flow-sensitive side-effect               intraprocedural code
                                               analysis, 634-636                        positioning, 681
factorial computation, data-flow            global optimization and,                 iterated dominance frontier
       analysis example, 261-262               323                                      computation, 254, 256
Farnum, Charles, 342                        interprocedural optimization             predecessor basic blocks, 175
field indirection operator ( * .) , in         and, 608-609, 664                     reducibility, 196-197
       hir , m ir , and lir , 74            optimizations, 323                       for register allocation by graph
field selection operator (.)             flow-insensitive interprocedural               coloring, 512, 513, 518, 521,
    in hir , m ir , and lir , 74, 79           alias analysis, 642-654                  522
    in ican , 27, 34                        binding graph construction,              reverse extended basic blocks,
file storage class, 44                         643, 645                                  175
finite differences, method of,              combining alias information              successor basic blocks, 175
       435                                     with alias-free version, 651,         translating to SSA form,
Fischer, Charles N., 159, 160                  654                                      256-257, 349-350
fixed points, 226-227                       computing formal-parameter            fonts, xbnf notation, 19
    maximum (MFP), 227                         aliases, 650-651, 653              for statements
floating-point expressions,                 example program, 643, 644                hir , 78-79
       algebraic simplification,            extended formal parameter set,           ican , 39
       342-343                                 643                                   iterators in ican , 39-40
floating-point registers, ican              inverting nonlocal alias function,    Fortran
       representation, 82                      646-647, 648                          aliased variables and, 641
floating-point values                       marking algorithm, 650,                  aliases in Fortran 77,
    constant folding for, 330-331              652-653                                  298-299
    data-cache optimization and,            nonlocal aliases, 643-644,               aliases in Fortran 90, 301-302,
       688-689                                 646-648                                  305
    in ican , 81                            pair binding graph construction,         arrays, column-major order, 107
    in h ir , lir , and m ir , 76              649-650                               call by reference in, 118
    parameter-passing in registers,         steps in computing, 643                  call by value-result in, 117
        121                              flow-insensitive side-effect analysis,      common storage class, 44
    run-time representation,                   619-633                               Cray extensions for Fortran 77,
        106-107                             binding graph construction,                 299, 305, 708
flow dependence                                623-627                               enumerated value
    defined, 268                            call graph construction,                    representation, 107
    in dependence graphs, 268                  628-631                               Fortran FI compiler, 484, 528
    operator (<$f), 268                     depth-first search, 632                  labels as arguments, 118-119
flow functions                              strongly connected components,           lexical and syntactic analysis in,
    alias propagator, 308                      631-632                                  3
    backward structural data-flow        flow insensitivity. See flow                preprocessor for, 10
       analysis, 244                           sensitivity                           reducibility in Fortran 77,
    fixed point, 226                     flow-sensitive interprocedural alias            196-197
    forward structural data-flow               analysis, 642                      forward data-flow analysis
       analysis, 237-239                 flow-sensitive side-effect analysis,        defined, 218
    lattices of monotone, 235-236              634-636                               iterative, 231-234
    overview, 226-227                    flowgraphs. See also control-flow           iterative forward bit-vector,
flow sensitivity                               analysis                                 218-223
    alias information, 294-296,             abstract, 198                            structural, 236-244
       315                                  constant propagation and,             forward edges, in depth-first
    flow-insensitive interprocedural           363                                      presentation of flowgraph
       alias analysis, 642-654              construction, 174-177                    defined, 178
                  Subject Index                                                                                   839


     label (F), 178                           expression occurrences,          Graham, Susan L., vii-ix, 52,
 forward substitution, 396                    390-394                                 139-158
 Fourier-Motzkin test, 284                 local vs., 378                      Graham-Glanville code-generator
 frame pointer (fp), 112-114               repeating, 394-395                        generator, 139-158
    a l l o c a ( ) and, 113               using AEin( ) data-flow                Action/Next table issues, 158
    described, 110, 112                       function, 388-390                   algorithm, 142-143
    stack pointer vs., 112-113          global copy propagation, 358-362          chain loop elimination, 152-154
    tail-call elimination and, 462         data-flow analysis for, 358-360        code generator, 140-144
frames. See stack frames                   data-flow equations, 359-360           code-generation algorithm,
Fraser, Christopher, 273, 768,             local copy propagation and, 361            142-143
        769                                performing, 360-361                    code-generator generator,
Free Software Foundation, 768              some copy assignments not                  144-151
Freiburghouse, Richard A., 483,               detected, 362                       components, 139
         528                            global data structures in structural      example for lir instructions,
function composition (o), 235                 control-flow analysis, 205              139-        140, 141
function types, in ican                 global offset table (GOT), 129,           machine-description rules,
    constants, 34                             130                                     140- 142
    constructor (—>), 23, 26, 28, 34    global offset table pointer (gp)          overview, 139-140
    overview, 34-35                        described, 111                         Polish-prefix input to code
functions, representation,                 used, 129, 663                            generator, 139-158, 764
        764-765                         global storage classes, 44                syntactic block elimination,
fundamental induction variables,        global symbol-table structure,                154-158
        426, 427                              49-54                            granularity of aliasing information,
future trends in compiler design,          closed scopes, 52-54                      2 9 7 ,3 1 5
        744                                stack-plus-hashing model,           graph coloring. See register
                                              52-54                                  allocation by graph coloring
           G                               symbol-table stacks, 49, 51         greater than operator (>)
                                           tree of local symbol tables,           in hir , m ir , and lir , 74, 75
Ganapathi, Mahadevan, 159, 160,               49, 50                              in ican , 27, 29
       608, 664                         global value numbering, 348-355        greater than or equal to operator
Gao, G. R., 817                            congruence of variables,               >=, in h ir , m ir , and lir , 74, 75
GCD (greatest common divisor)                 348-351                                in ican , 27, 29
       dependence test, 281-283            extending to dominator trees,       greatest common divisor (GCD)
GEM compilers. See Alpha                      355                                    dependence test, 281-283
       compilers                           generalizations to approach, 355    greedy algorithms, 141, 544
generating code. See automatic             local value numbering and, 344      greedy schedule, unconstrained,
       generation of code generators;      partitioning algorithm, 351-355           555-556
       code generation                     translating flowgraphs into SSA     Gross, Thomas, 542, 543
generation scavenging, 133                    form, 349-350                    group I optimizations, 323-324
generic simple constants (ican ),          value graphs, 349-351               group II optimizations, 324
       syntax, 28                       globally anticipatable values,         group III optimizations,
generic simple types (ican )                  410-411                                324-325
   list of, 23, 28                      GNU compilers, 768                     group IV optimizations, 325
   overview, 28-29                      Goldberg, David, 331                   grouping operator ({...)), in xbnf
Geschke, Charles M., 820                Goldin, Dina Q., 803                         notation, 19
global common-subexpression             Goldstine, Herman H., 459              Groves, Randy, 807
       elimination, 385-395             Golumbic, Martin C., 548, 803          Gupta, Anoop, 699
   algorithms, 388-390, 391-394         Goodman, James R., 740                 Gupta, Rajiv, 525, 689
   available expressions, 385-387,      GOT. See global offset table (GOT)
       390                              goto statements                                    H
   combining with local form, 394          ican form, 38
   control-flow analysis and, 175          labels as arguments, 118            Hall, Mary W., 469, 664, 806
   dealing with individual                 mir , 75-76                         Hanson, David, 768, 769
840                 Subject Index

hashing                                   HP pa-risc compiler. See pa-risc           summary, 476
   function representation, 764,              compiler                            independent-attributive data-flow
       765                                Hummel, Joseph, 287                            analysis, 229
   local common-subexpression                                                     index vectors, lexicographic
       elimination, 384-385                          I                                   ordering of, 275
   local symbol-table management,                                                 induction variables
      48-49                               I-cache optimization. See                  basic or fundamental, 426, 427
   set representation, 761-762                   instruction-cache                   basis, 428
   stack-plus-hashing model,                     optimization                        class of, 428
       52-54                              IBM 801 Rise system, 485, 718              dependent, 426-427, 429
height of a lattice, 226                  IBM PL/1 compiler, 528                     identifying, 426-435
Hendren, Laurie J., 262, 287, 290         IBM System/370 compiler, 106,              induction-variable expansion,
Hennessy, John, 259, 260, 524,                   484, 528, 5 3 1,575                     562-563
      542 ,5 4 3 , 662                    IBM XL compilers. See power and            overview, 425-426
Henry, Robert, 158, 526, 769                     PowerPC compilers                   removal of, 447-453
heuristics for register spilling. See     iburg , 769-770                            replacing (linear-function test
      register allocation by graph        ican . See Informal Compiler                   replacement), 447, 448-453
      coloring                                   Algorithm Notation (ican )          strength reduction, 435-443,
Hewlett-Packard pa-risc compiler.         ICP lattices. See integer constant-           444
      See pa-risc compiler                       propagation (ICP) lattices       induction-variable optimizations,
hexadecimal notation, 17                  identifiers, m ir , 76                        425- 453
hexadecimal number, begins with           identity function, (id( )), 233            addressing modes and, 426
      Ox, in hir , m ir , and lir , 74,   if simplifications, 585-586                constant propagation and,
      76                                      common subexpressions, 586                426
hierarchical reduction, 568-569               constant-valued conditions,            data-flow analysis in, 428
   order of optimizations, 574-575               585-586                             identifying induction variables,
high-level data-flow analysis, 202            described, 580, 585                       426- 435
high-level intermediate languages,            for empty arms, 585                    linear-function test replacement,
      69-71. See also hir                 if statements                                 447, 448-453
   abstract syntax tree, 70-71                code representations for               live variables analysis, 443-446
   in compilation process, 69-70                 structural data-flow analysis,      order of optimizations, 458
   dependence analysis in, 71                    247-248                             removal of induction variables,
   order of optimizations, 325-326            flow functions for structural             447-453
   in preprocessors, 69-70                       data-flow analysis, 237-238,        strength reduction, 435-443,
High-level Intermediate                          244-245                                444
      Representation. See hir                 hir , 78                               summary, 458
Hilfinger, Paul, 525                          ican , 38-39                        infinite loop. See nonterminating
hir , 78-79. See also intermediate            m ir , 75-76                              computation
      code                                IL-1 code (Intel compilers), 736,       infinite value («>), in ican , 24, 28,
   canonical form for loops, 274                 737                                    29
   definition of, 78-79                   IL-2 code (Intel compilers),            Informal Compiler Algorithm
   described, 4                                  736-738                                Notation (ican ), 19-42
   differences from m ir , 78-79          immediate dominators, 183-184,             comments in, 21
   ican representation, 81-82,                   189-191                             constraints of constructed types,
      85-86                               implicit resources, dependency                24
   instructions, 78-79                           computation and, 269                constructors, 23
   loop code, 5                           improper intervals or regions, 196,        data types, 27-36
   operators in IROper, 82                       203, 240-241                        expressions, 23, 27, 28
Hobbs, Steven O., 820                     in-line expansion, 470-472                 Extended Backus-Naur Form
Hood, Robert T., 637                          advantages, 470-471                        (xb n f ), 19-20
Hopcroft, John, 351                           mechanisms required, 471-472           generic simple constants, 28
Hopkins, Martin, 494                          order of optimizations, 477-478        generic simple types, 23, 28-29
                 Subject Index                                                                             841


  hir representation in, 81-82,          automating instruction-            Intel reference compilers for 386
      85- 86                                 scheduler generation,                family, 735-744
   intermediate-code operators, 82           543                               assembly language, 752-753
   keywords, reserved in, 40             balanced scheduling, 545              code generator (Proton), 735,
   lexical conventions, 21-22            basic-block scheduling, 531              738-739
   lir representation in, 81-82,         branch scheduling, 533-535,           code reselection, 740
      86- 92                                 536                               data-dependence testing, 738
   mir representation in, 81-85          combining with register               data-flow analysis, 738
   naming of data structures and             allocation, 526                   f xch instruction, 740
      routines, 92-95                    cross-block scheduling, 531,          global optimizer, 738
   overview, 23-25                           546-547                           IL-1 code, 736, 737
   procedure declarations, 23, 24,       DEC GEM compilers, 729,               IL-2 code, 736-738
      26- 27                                 730                               instruction combining, 739-740
   program syntax, 25                    described, 322                        instruction scheduling, 740
   statements, 36-40                     Intel 386 family compilers, 739,      instruction selection, 739-740
   syntax conventions, 21                    740                               Intel 386 family architecture,
   type definitions, 23, 24, 25-26,      list scheduling, 535, 537-543            734-735
      27 - 36                            loop unrolling, 532                   interprocedural optimizer,
   variable declarations, 23, 26-27      order of optimizations, 532,             736-737
inlining. See in-line expansion              574-575                           languages supported, 735
inlining, automatic. See procedure       overview, 531-532                     low-level optimizations,
      integration                        percolation scheduling, 532,             740-741
input dependence                             571-573                           memory optimizer, 738
   defined, 268                          power and PowerPC compilers,          Pentium assembly code
   operator (<$*), 268                       723                                  examples, 741-744
inside-out order, 609                    register allocation and, 545          position-independent code, 741
instruction buffer, 672                  register renaming, 532                Proton intermediate language
instruction-cache optimization,          repetition of, 14                        (PIL), 738-739
      672-682                            software pipelining, 531, 532,        register allocation, 740
   combining intra- and                      548-569                           sparse conditional constant
      interprocedural methods, 682       sparc compilers, 713                     propagation, 738
   instruction prefetching, 672-673      speculative loading and               structure, 735-736
   instruction-cache impact, 672             boosting, 547-548              interference graphs, 494-497
   intraprocedural code                  speculative scheduling, 548           adjacency-list representation,
      positioning, 677-681               for superscalar implementations,         487, 496-497, 498, 499
   order of optimizations, 702-703           543-545                           adjacency-matrix representation,
   overview, 701                         trace scheduling, 532, 569-570           487, 495-496, 497
   procedure and block placement,        variable expansion, 532               degree < R rule, 503-506
      676-677                         instruction-scheduler generation,        described, 481, 485
   procedure sorting, 673-676                automating, 543                   examples, 486, 503, 513-516,
   procedure splitting, 681-682       integer constant-propagation (ICP)          519-522
instruction combining. See machine           lattices, 224-225, 228            overview, 494-495
      idioms and instruction          in te g e r ican type                    pruning, 488, 503-506
      combining                          binary operators, 29                  reducing register pressure, 506
instruction decomposing, 602             overview, 29                          register pressure, 506
instruction prefetching               integer programming, 280                 spilling symbolic registers, 488,
   branch prediction and, 673         integer registers                           506-511
   hardware prefetching, 672             ican representation, 82            interferences, defined, 481
   order of optimizations, 702-703       parameter-passing in, 121-123      interlocks, 532-533
   software prefetching, 672-673      integers                              intermediate code. See also hir ;
instruction scheduling, 531-577          ican representation, 81                  lir ; m ir ; SSA form
   algorithm, 540-541                    run-time representation, 106          algorithms operating on, 4
842                Subject Index

intermediate code (cont.)                  data-flow analysis, 619-637        interprocedural data-flow analysis,
   code-generation approach and,           flow insensitivity and, 608-609          619-637
       138                                 flow sensitivity and, 608-609         binding graph construction,
   debugging output, 69                    in-line expansion, 470-472               623-627
   Directed Acyclic Graphs                 may and must information and,         call graph construction,
       (DAGs), 100-101                         608-609                              628-631
   external representation issues,         optimizations, 656-659                depth-first search, 632
      69                                   order of optimizations, 665-666       flow-insensitive side-effect
   high-level intermediate                 overview, 607-609                        analysis, 619-633
      languages, 69-71                     parameter-passing and, 608            flow-sensitive side-effect
   h ir , 78-79, 85-86                     performance and, 608                     analysis, 634-636
   ican naming of data structures          procedure cloning, 607-608,           other issues in computing side
      and routines, 92-95                      657                                  effects, 637
   ican representation of mir , hir ,      procedure integration, 465-470        overview, 619
      and lir , 81-92                      “ programming in the large”           program summary graph,
   lir , 79-81, 86-92                          issues, 663-664                      634-636
   low-level intermediate                  register allocation, 659-662          program supergraph, 634
      languages, 71-72                     separate compilation and, 608         strongly connected components,
   medium-level intermediate               tail-call elimination, 461-465           631-632
      languages, 71                     interprocedural constant              interprocedural register allocation,
   mir , 73-78, 82-85                          propagation, 637-641,                659-662
   multi-level intermediate                    665-666                           annotations, 660-661
      languages, 72-73                     algorithm, 637-639                    compile-time, 662
   new intermediate code design vs.        choices for jump and return-          importance of, 664
      existing one, 67-69                      jump functions, 640-641           issues requiring special handling,
   optimization and, 67-68                 importance of, 664                       661-662
   Polish-prefix notation, 101             jump functions, 637                   link-time, 659-662
   program-dependence graphs               order of optimizations,               order of optimizations, 665-666
      (PDGs), 284-286                          665-666                        interval control-flow analysis,
   quadruples, 96                          procedure cloning and, 641               197-202. See also structural
   translating between forms,              return-jump functions, 637               control-flow analysis
      68-69                                site-independent form, 637            advantages, 173
   trees, 97-100                           site-specific form, 637               basic steps, 200-202
   triples, 96-97                          support of a function, 637            control trees, 198, 199
   variety in design, 4                 interprocedural constants, for jump      minimal vs. maximal intervals,
Internet software resources, 767               and return-jump functions,           199, 200
interprocedural alias analysis,                640                               overview, 173
      641-656                           interprocedural control-flow             structural analysis compared to,
   example, 642                                analysis, 609-618                   202
   flow-insensitive, 642-654               ican code for call graph           interval data-flow analysis,
   flow-sensitive, 642                        construction, 609-611                 249-250
   for languages with call by value        inside-out order, 609                 in power and PowerPC
      and pointers, 654-656                invocation order, 609                    compilers, 722
   overview, 641-642                       outside-in order, 609                 reaching definitions example,
interprocedural analysis and               with procedure-valued variables,         249-250
      optimization, 607-668                    612-618                           structural analysis compared to,
   aggregation of global references,       reverse invocation order, 609            249
      663                                  separate compilation and, 611      intraprocedural code positioning,
   alias analysis, 641-656                 types of actions for procedure­          677-681
   constant propagation,                      valued variables, 615-616          algorithm, 678-681
      637-641                           interprocedural data-cache usage,        order of optimizations, 678
   control-flow analysis, 609-618              689                               overview, 677-678
                  Subject Index                                                                                     843


   procedure splitting and, 681        Kleene closure, unary postfix                  strongly distributive, 236
intraprocedural optimizations, 607          operator (*), applied to                  top value (T), 223
invocation order, 609                       functions, defined, 235, 248              top value (t ), in ican , 225, 232,
Irlam, Gordon, 768                     Knobe, Kathleen, 525, 530                         364
irreducibility                         Knoop, Jens, 407, 443, 597                 lattices of monotone flow
   approaches to, 197                  Koblenz, Brian, 525, 530                          functions, 235-236
   prevalence of, 196-197              Krawczyk, Hugo, 803                            composition operator (o), 225
   See also improper intervals         Kuck, David J., 637                            effective height, 226
isolated expressions, 413                                                             fixed points, 226-227
iterated dominance frontiers,                       L                                 identity function (id), 235
      254-256                                                                         Kleene closure operator, unary
iteration space, 275                   labels, passing as arguments,                     postfix (*), 235, 248
iteration-space traversal, 275, 276,         118-119                                  nonempty closure operator,
      277                              label separator (:)                               unary postfix (+), 235
iterative, defined, 218                   in hir , m ir , and lir , 74, 75, 79,   lazy code motion, 407
iterative data-flow analysis,                80                                   lc c , 768
      231-235                             in ican , 37                            leaf routine, defined, 472
   for backward problems, 235          label variables, in interprocedural        leaf-routine optimization, 472-
   iterative forward bit-vector              side-effect analysis, 637                   473. See also shrink
       problem, 218-223                Lam, Monica, 289, 568, 690, 698,                  wrapping
   worklist algorithm, 232-233               699, 738, 769                            applicability, 472-473
iterative forward bit-vector           Larus, James, 525, 598, 767                    order of optimizations, 477-478
       problem, 218-223                last-write trees, 259                          overview, A ll
iterators, for statements (ican ),     latestness of expressions, in              Lee, Peter H., 131, 132
       39-40                                 partial-redundancy analysis,         Lengauer, Thomas, 185, 738
                                             412-413                              less than operator (<)
                                       lattices                                       in hir , m ir , and lir , 74
          J                                                                           in ican , 27, 29
                                          of bit vectors (BV"), 224, 226
Java, run-time support, 131-133           bottom value (_L), 223                  less than or equal to operator (<=)
Johnson, Steven C., 165                   bottom value (J-), in ican , 225,           in hir , m ir , and lir , 74
Johnsson, Richard K., 820                     364                                     in ican , 27, 29
join node, 175                            distributive, 224                       Lewis, Harry R., 348, 729
join operation, for lattices, 223,        greater than operator (□), 225          lexical analysis
      225
Jones, Neil D., 225, 262, 287, 290,
      306
                                             P ),
                                          greater than or equal to operator
                                                  225
                                          height, 226
                                                                                      combining with syntactic
                                                                                         analysis, 3
                                                                                      described, 2
Joy, William N., 52                       integer constant-propagation                for Fortran, 3
jump functions, 637-641                       (ICP) lattice, 224-225, 228         lexicographically less than operator
                                          join operator (u), 223                         (<h 275
           K                              less than operator (E), 225             lexicographically less than or equal
                                          less than operator (c), in ican ,              to operator (;<), 276
Kam, J. B., 227                               639                                 lexicographically positive distance
Kennedy, Ken, 449, 620, 637, 642,         less than or equal to operator                 vector, 690-691
       664,694                               P ),2 2 5                            Li, Kai, 548
Keppel, David, 771                       meet operator (n), 223, 225              libraries
Kerns, Daniel R., 545                    meet operator (n), in ican , 232,            interprocedural issues, 664
keywords (ican )                             367, 639                                 shared, 127-131
   list of, 40                           monotone, 226                            Lichtenstein, W., 817
   reserved words, 25, 40                overview, 223-226                        lifetimes of variables, 44
Kildall, Gary A., 227, 259               partial order on, 225                    linear-function test replacement,
killing definitions, 220                 product of lattices, 224                        447, 448-453
Kim, Ki-Chang, 807                       product operator (x), 224                    described, 447
844                Subject Index

 linear-function test replace­             performance and, 437                logical or operator (V), in ican , 27,
        ment (cont.)                   literal constants, as jump and                 28
     ican code, 450-453                       return-jump functions, 640       loop dependence tests, 279-284
    procedure, 448-450                 live range, in register allocation by   loop distribution, 694
link-time interprocedural register            priority-based graph coloring,   loop fusion, 684, 693-694
        allocation, 659-662                   524-526                          loop header, 191
linked-list representation             live variables                          loop interchange, 684, 691
     bit-vector representation vs.,        defined, 443, 445                   loop invariants, removal of
        757-759                            in interference graphs, 494                induction variables and, 449
    of sequences, 763                      live range, 524                     loop inversion, 587-588
    of sets, 760                           in register renaming, 564              in DEC GEM compilers for
Linpack                                live variables analysis, 229,                  Alpha, 729
    procedure integration and,                443-446                             described, 580, 587
        465-466                            backward data-flow analysis,           determining that a loop is
    propagating information, 657              445-447                                 entered, 587-588
lir , 79-81. See also Graham-              live vs. dead variables, 443, 445      nested loops, 587-588
        Glanville code-generator       Lo, Jack L., 545                        loop optimizations, 425-460
        generator; intermediate code   load operator, unary (t), in               induction-variable
    array representation, 68-69               machine grammars, 139                   optimizations, 425-453
    assignments, 80                    loads, generating in symbol tables,        order of optimizations, 458-459
    definition of, 79-81                      59-63                               overview, 322, 425, 457-459
    dependence DAGs, 270               local common-subexpression                 transformations for data-cache
    described, 4                              elimination, 379-385                    optimization, 689-695
    differences from m ir , 79-81,         algorithm, 380-381                     unnecessary bounds-checking
        492-494                            available expressions, 379                 elimination, 454-457
    Graham-Glanville code­                 binary case, 379-382                loop peeling, 374, 684
        generator generator, 139,         combining with global, 394           loop permutation, 691
        140                               example, 382-384                     loop reversal, 692
    ican representation, 81-82,            fast implementation, 384-385        loop simplifications, 580, 586-587
        86-92                             global vs., 378                      loop skewing, 692-693
    instructions as ican tuples,           overview, 379                       loop tiling, 694-695
        91-92                             repeating, 394-395                      data-cache organization and,
    loop code, 5                       local copy propagation, 356-358                697
    memory addresses, 91                  algorithm, 356-358                      locality and, 695-698
    operators in IROper, 82               generalizing for extended basic         loops not fully tilable in, 696,
    tail-call optimization, 463               blocks, 361                             697
LISP                                      global copy propagation and,            tile loop, 694
    compile-time interprocedural              361                                 tile size and, 697-698
        register allocation, 662       local methods of register allocation,   loop transformations for data-
    dynamic scoping, 45                       483-485                                 cache optimization, 689-695
    register allocator, 525            local stack frames. See stack frames       lexicographically positive
    run-time support, 131-133          local symbol-table management,                 distance vector, 690-691
list scheduling, 535, 537-543                 47-49                               locality and loop tiling, 695-698
    algorithm, 540-541                    balanced binary tree, 48                loop distribution, 694
    approach to, 540                      hashing, 48-49                          loop fusion, 693-694
    basic-block boundaries, 537        local transparency, 408-410                loop interchange, 691
    delay function computation,        locally anticipatable values, 410          loop permutation, 691
        538, 539                       logical and operator (&), in ican ,        loop reversal, 692
    dependence DAG, 537-543                   27, 28                              loop skewing, 692-693
    heuristics, 542                    logical not operator, unary (!)            loop tiling, 694-698
    ican code, 538-541                    in hir , m ir , and lir , 74, 75        overview, 689-691
    NP-hard problem, 537                  in ican , 27, 28                        types, 690
                   Subject Index                                                                         845


    unimodular transformations,             strongly connected components,     Intel IL-1, 736-737
       690-693                                 193-196                         order of optimizations, 325-327
 loop unrolling, 559-562                    well-behaved, in C, 425            register allocation, 482-483
    architectural characteristics and,   low-level intermediate languages,     Sun IR, 709-711
       560-       561, 562                     71-72. See also l i r         Medium-level Intermediate
   combining with window                    order of optimizations,               Representation. See mir
       scheduling, 553, 555                    326-327, 328                  meet operation
   described, 532, 573                   Low-level Intermediate                for lattices, 223, 225
    ican code, 561                             Representation. See l i r       meet-over-all paths (MOP)
   instruction-level parallelism         low-level model of optimization,         solution, 227
       increase, 562                           7-9                           meet-over-all paths (MOP)
   loop characteristics and,             low-level optimizations. See             solution, 227
       561- 562                                control-flow and low-level    Mellor-Crummey, J. M., 806
   order of optimizations, 573,                optimizations                 member of set operator (e), in
       574-575                                                                    ican , 27, 28, 31, 34
   overview, 559                                     M                       memory addresses, lir , 91
   register renaming and, 561                                                memory hierarchy optimizations,
   rolled loop, 559                      machine idioms, defined, 599             669-704
   trace scheduling and, 569             machine idioms and instruction        combined or unified cache,
   unrolling factor, 559                      combining, 599-602                  670
loop-carried dependence, 278               described, 580                      data-cache impact, 670-671
loop-independent dependence, 278           examples, 599-602                   data-cache optimization,
loop-invariant code motion,                instruction combining, 599             687-700
       397-407                             Intel 386 family compilers,         effectiveness of caches, 670
   algorithm, 397-400, 403-404                739-740                          instruction-cache impact, 672
   examples, 400-403, 404-406              machine idioms, 599                 instruction-cache optimization,
   identifying loop-invariant              order of optimizations, 604            672-682
       computations, 397-398             machine-level DAGs, 542-543           order of optimizations, 701-703
   order of optimizations, 421           machine simulators, 767-768           scalar replacement of array
   overview, 377, 397, 420               Mansour, Yishay, 803                     elements, 682-687
   preventing errors in, 401-403         Markstein, Peter, 494                 scalar vs. memory-oriented
   reassociation with, 415-416           matrix multiplication, 671               optimizations, 700
   reductions, 406-407                   maximal clique separators,            translation-lookaside buffer
loops. See also dominators; for               525-526                             (TLB), 670
       statements; if statements;        maximal intervals, 198-199          memory speed, disparity with
       while statements                  maximal munch algorithms, 141            processor speeds, 669
   canonical form, 689                   maximal strongly connected          Mesa, alias determination,
   canonical loop test, 275                   components, 194                     642-643
   control-flow analysis, 191-196        maximum fixed point (MFP), 227      MFP. See maximum fixed point
   dependences in, 274-279               may information                          (MFP)
   dominance tree for, 171-172             alias analysis, 294, 295-296,     minimal intervals, 199, 200
   doubly nested, 275-276                     315                            mips compilers
   flow functions for structural           global optimization and, 323        branch architecture and, 533
       analysis, 237-239                   interprocedural optimization        mips machine simulator,
   headers, 191                               and, 608, 664                       767-768
   iteration space, 275                    optimization, 323                   mixed model of optimization in,
   iteration-space traversal, 275,       McFarling, Scott, 682                    9
       276, 277                          McKinley, K. S., 806                  most pipelining algorithm,
   kinds of optimizations, 6-7           medium-level intermediate                567
   natural loops, 191-193                     languages, 71, 72. See also      procedure integration and,
   nesting depth and register                 M IR                                469-470
       allocation, 483, 484                DEC CIL, 727-728                    type checking, 132
846                Subject Index


mir , 73-78. See also intermediate     multi-level intermediate languages,      notation. See also Informal
      code                                   72-73                                    Compiler Algorithm Notation
  alternative pa-risc code             multiplication operator (*)                    (ican )
     sequences, 72                        in hir , mir , and lir , 74, 75         for numbers in this book, 17
  array representation, 6 8-69            in ican , 27, 29                      not equal to operator
  assignments, 75                      must information                            !=, in hir , mir , and lir , 74, 75
  changes to define hir , 7 8 -7 9        alias analysis, 294, 2 9 5 -2 9 6 ,     * , in ican , 27, 28, 29, 30
  changes to define lir , 7 9 -8 1 ,         315                                not member of set operator (**), in
      4 9 2 -4 9 4                       global optimization and,                     ican , 27, 31
  comments, 76                               323                                NP-hard and N P -complete
  definition of, 78-79                    interprocedural optimization                problems, 537, 544, 573,
  described, 4                               and, 608, 664                            602, 637, 689
  exam ples, 76-78                        optimization, 323                     nullification. See branch scheduling
  expressions, 84-85                   M yers, E. A., 634                       number notations, 17
  forward substitution in, 396
  g o to instruction, 75-76                        N                                       O
  ican representation of, 81-85
  identifiers, 76                      Nahshon, Itai, 803                       Odnert, Daryl, 662
  instructions, 75-76                  name mangling, 10                        “ off-by-one” errors, 454
  instructions as ican tuples,         name scoping, 663                        Omega test, 284
      82-84                            names, in register allocation by         one or more copies operator, unary
  integer constants, 76                        graph coloring. See webs              postfix (+ ), in xbnf notation,
  loop code, 5                         naming conventions, ican data                  19, 20
  operators, 75                                structures and routines,         one-pass compilers
  operators in IROper, 82                      92-95                              described, 3
  receives, 75                         N aN (not a number), in ansi/ieee          efficiency of, 3, 6
  xbnf syntax of instructions,                 floating point, 342              opcodes
      73-75                            natural loops, 191-193                     Alpha, 751-752
  xbnf syntax of programs and              algorithm, 192                         Intel 386 family architecture,
     program units, 74                     preheaders, 193                            753
mixed model of optimization,           natural loop schema, 203                   pa-risc , 754-755
     7 -10                             negation operator, unary (-)               power and PowerPC, 750
M L, run-time support, 131-133             in hir , mir , and lir , 74,           sparc, 748-749
M odula-2                                      75                               operating-system interface, 3
  enumerated value                         in ican , 27, 29                     operators
     representation, 107               negative distance, in direction            assignment statements (ican ),
  reducible flowgraphs and, 196                vectors                                3 6 ,3 8
  scoping issues, 52                       > ,2 7 8                               ican , 2 7-36
module storage class, 44                   - ,2 7 8                               hir , 82
modulo operator (%), in ican , 27,     nested regions, 198                        lir , 82
     29                                Nickerson, Brian, 523                      mir , 75, 82
monotone flow functions, 226           Nicolau, Alexandru, 287, 571, 573          sets, 759
M OP solution. See meet-over-all       n i l value (ican ), overview, 24, 35      size operator (ican ), 36
     paths (MOP) solution              node splitting, 197                        xbnf notation, 19-20
M orel, Etienne, 407, 422              non-empty closure operator,              optimality principle, 160
most pipelining algorithm, 567                 unary postfix (+ ), applied to   optimization. See also specific types
move conditional, 571-5 7 2                    functions, 235                         o f optimization
move operation, 5 7 1-572              nonterminating computation. See            criteria for, 320
Mowry, Todd C., 699                            infinite loop                      group I, 3 2 3-324
Muchnick, Steven S., 225, 262,         wop, in delay slots, 535                   group II, 324
     264, 265, 287, 290, 306,          normalized form for loops,                 group III, 3 24-325
     316, 373, 542, 575, 576                   689                                group IV, 325
                     Subject Index                                                                                  847


    importance of, 6-7, 320-321,              floating-point register /, left part   parameters. See also arguments;
       323-325                                   (°/.f r/L), 754                           parameter-passing (run-time)
   intermediate code and, 67-68              floating-point register      right         defined, 117
   as misnomer, 319                             p art (#
                                                       /,fr/R), 754                  ParaScope programming
   order of optimizations,                   integer register i (#
                                                                 /«r/), 754                environment, 637
      325-328                              PA-Risc co m pilers                       parsing. See syntactic analysis
   performance and, 319, 320, 321            alternative sequences for m i r ,       partial redundancy, defined, 407
   safe or conservative, 319-320                 72                                  partial-redundancy analysis, 230
optimizing compilers                          assembly language, 753-755             partial-redundancy elimination,
  aggressive, placement of                    branch architecture and, 533                 407-415
      optimizations in, 11-14                 low-level model of optimization           advantages of modern
  low-level model, 7-9                           in, 9                                     formulation, 378, 421
  mixed model, 7-10                            m achine id iom s an d instruction       critical edges, 407, 408
  placement of optimizations,                       com b in in g, 599, 600-602         delayed expressions, 411-412
      11-14                                    s l l i c in, 68                         earliestness, 411
  structure of, 7-11                           type checking, 132                       future trends, 744
optional operator (|...|), in x b n f          u c o d e in, 68                         globally anticipatable values,
      notation, 19, 20                     p ack ed record s, 108                          410-411
order of optimizations                     p air binding g rap h , 649-650              implementing, 414
  control-flow and low-level                   m arkin g algorith m , 650,              isolated expressions, 413
      optimizations, 603-604                     652-653                                latestness, 412-413
  early optimizations, 372-373             ParaFrase programming                        lazy code motion, 407
  instruction scheduling, 532,                   environment, 637                       local transparency, 408-410
      574-575                              parallel computation graphs                  locally anticipatable values,
  interprocedural optimizations,                 (PSGs), 571-573                           410
      665-666                              parameter-passing                            order of optimizations, 421
  loop optimizations, 458-459                 in C, aliases and, 301                    overview, 377, 407, 420
  memory hierarchy                            in Fortran 77, aliases and,               reassociation with, 415-416
      optimizations, 701-703                     298-299                                value numbering vs., 343
  overview, 11-14, 325-328                    in-line expansion and,                 partitioning algorithm for global
  percolation scheduling, 532, 574               471-472                                   value numbering, 351-355
  postpass or peephole                        interprocedural optimization           Pascal
      optimizations, 603                         and, 608                               alias determination, 642-643
   procedure optimizations,                   jump and return-jump functions,           aliases in, 299-300, 304, 305
      477-478                                    641                                    basic-block boundaries, 174
  redundancy elimination, 327,                in Pascal, aliases and, 299-300           character string representation,
      421-422                                 procedure integration and,                    108-109
   register allocation, 481,                     468-469                                enumerated value
      482-483, 527-528                     parameter-passing (run-time),                   representation, 107
  trace scheduling, 532, 574                     116-119                                loop unrolling, 559
output dependence                            call by name, 118                          pointers, 258
   defined, 268                              call by reference, 117-118                 scoping and symbol-table
output-dependence operator (5°),             call by result, 117                           structure, 49, 50
      268                                    call by value, 117                         unnecessary bounds-checking
outside-in order, 609                         call by value-result, 117                    elimination for, 454-457
                                              in flat register file, 121-123         pass-through parameter, for jump
            P                                 invoking procedures, 119-126                 and return-jump functions,
                                              labels, 118-119                              641
PA-RISC                                       mechanisms, 116-117                    path expressions, 260
  branch architecture, 533                    procedure-valued variables, 126        path strings, 163
  floating-point register i (°/0f r /'),      with register windows, 123-126         PCGs. See parallel computation
     754                                      on run-time stack, 123                       graphs (PCGs)
848                  Subject Index

PDGs. See program-dependence                Pinter, Ron Y., 803                                 + , 278
       graphs (PDGs)                        Pinter, Shlomit S., 526                          postdominators, 182
PDP-11 b l i s s compiler. See b l i s s    pipeline architectures, 531,                     postorder traversal, 180, 181
       compiler                                   532-533                                    postpass optimizations. See
peephole optimizations                         interlocks, 532-533                                  peephole optimizations
   Alpha compilers, 729, 730                pipelining. See software pipelining              po w er and PowerPC compilers,
   branch prediction, 580,                  PL.8 compiler, 485, 718                                 716-725
       597-599                              PL/I, character string                              alias information, 721
   described, 579, 597, 603-604                   representation, 108-109                       assembly code examples,
   Intel compilers, 739                     placement of optimizations. See                         723-725
   machine idioms and instruction                 order of optimizations                        assembly language, 749-750
       combining, 580, 599-602              PLT. See procedure linkage table                    branch architecture and, 533
   order of optimizations, 603                    (PLT)                                         computation table (CT), 719
   p o w er and PowerPC compilers,          pointer indirection operator, unary                 control-flow analysis, 721
       723                                       ( * ) , in h i r , m ir , an d l ir , 74,      data-flow analysis, 722
   sp a r c compilers, 713                         75, 79                                       data prefetching, 698
Pelegri-Llopart, Eduardo, 165               poin ters                                           development, 718
Pentium. See Intel 386 family                  in C, aliases and, 294, 300-301                  instruction scheduler, 723
       architecture                            data-flow analysis, 258                          languages supported, 718
PentiumPro. See Intel 386 family               described, 110-111                               low-level model of optimization
       architecture                            in Fortran 77 Cray extensions,                       in, 9
   branch architecture, 533                       aliases and, 299                              machine idioms and instruction
percent character (7,#/0), in ic a n , 29      in Fortran 90, aliases and, 301                      combining, 599, 601-602
percolation scheduling, 571-573                interprocedural alias analysis                   optimizer transformations, 722
   algorithm, 572                                 and, 654-656                                  order of optimizations, 705
   computation nodes, 571                      in interprocedural side-effect                   peephole optimizations, 723
   described, 532                                 analysis, 637                                 po w er architecture, 716-717
   meta-transformations, 573                   in Pascal, aliases and, 299, 300                 PowerPC architecture, 717
   order of optimizations, 532, 574            to procedure descriptors, 126                    procedure descriptor table, 719
   transformations, 571-573                    run-time representation, 108                     procedure list, 719
   write-live dependence and, 571           Polish-prefix notation                              register allocators, 523, 723
perfect static predictor, 598                  in Graham-Glanville code­                        register coalescing, 723
performance. See also efficiency                  generator generator, 142                      scavenging, in register
   algebraic simplifications and,             overview, 101                                         allocation, 723
       334-335                                semantics-directed parsing,                       structure, 718-719
   instruction scheduling and, 573                 159-160                                      symbolic register table, 719
   interprocedural optimization             polymorphic languages, run-time                     t o b e y common back end,
       and, 608                                   support, 131-133                                  719-723
   list scheduling and, 437                 polynomial functions, for jump and                  “ wand waving,” 722
   as optimization criterion, 320                 return-jump functions, 641                    XIL code, 719-721
   optimizations and, 319, 320,             portability, low-level vs. mixed                    YIL code, 721
       321                                        optimization, 8-9                          power test, 284
   procedure integration and, 468,          postdominance                                    precedes-in-execution-order
       469-470                                defined, 182                                          operator (<), 267, 275
   processor speeds vs. memory                tree, 284-285                                  predecessor basic blocks, 175
       speeds, 669                          position-independent code, 128,                     register allocation and, 484
   register allocation by graph                   713,741                                    prefetching
       coloring and, 481                    position indicator (•), in LR(1)                    data prefetching, 688, 698-700
   trace scheduling and, 570                      items, 144                                    instruction prefetching, 672-673
period, of a recurrence, 683                positive distance, in direction                  prefix unary operators ( ic a n ). See
0-function, static single assignment              vectors                                           unary operators ( ic a n )
       form, 252, 253                          < ,2 7 8                                      preheaders of natural loops, 193
                   Subject Index                                                                                  849


 preorder traversal, 179-181            procedure specialization. See         pruned SSA form, 258
    structural control-flow analysis,          procedure cloning              pruning interference graphs, 488,
        207                             procedure splitting, 681-682               503-506
preprocessors                           procedure-valued variables, 126       pseudo-operations, s p a r c , 749
    described, 10                          interprocedural control-flow       PSPACE-hard, 612
   high-level intermediate                     analysis, 612-618
       languages in, 69-70              procedures, 119-126. See also
                                                                                           Q
preserving definitions, 220                    parameter-passing (run-time)
priority-based graph coloring,             call, 119                          QPT, 770
       524-525. See also register          epilogue, 120                      QPT.STATS, 770
       allocation by graph coloring        extended formal parameters,        quadruples
procedure and block placement in               643                              infix form, 96
       instruction cache, 676-677          Fortran 90, aliases and, 301-302     translation from trees,
procedure-call side effects. See side      Pascal, aliases and, 300                99-100
       effects of procedure calls          phases in run-time execution,        translation to trees, 98-99
procedure-call statements (ican ),             119-120                          translation to triples, 97
       form, 38                            prologue, 119-120                    trees vs., 98
procedure cloning, 607-608, 657            static link, 114                     triples vs., 96
   order of optimizations, 665             value graphs, 349-351              quotation mark character (#/«"), in
procedure declarations (ican )          product of lattices, 224                   ic a n , 29
   overview, 23, 24                     production, x b n f notation, 19-20
   syntax, 26-27                        Production-Quality Compiler                        R
procedure descriptors, 126                    Compiler (PQCC), 730
procedure integration, 465-470          Proebsting, Todd, 273, 769            R-coloring. See also register
   breadth of, 466-468                  profiling tools, 770-771                    allocation by graph coloring
   effects of, 469-470                  program management,                      defined, 485
   implementation, 468-469                    interprocedural issues,            degree < R rule, 503-506
   order of optimizations, 477                663-664                         Rainish, Victor, 548
   performance and, 468                 program points                        range checking, 454. See also
   summary, 476                            alias-propagator flow functions,         unnecessary bounds-checking
procedure linkage table (PLT), 130,           308                                   elimination
       131                                 defined, 295, 303                  reaching-definitions analysis,
procedure optimizations, 461-479           functions mapping, 304                   218-223
   described, 322, 461                  program summary graph, 634-636           basic blocks and, 218
   in-line expansion, 470-472           program supergraph, 634                  correspondence between bit-
   leaf-routine optimization,           program syntax ( ic a n ), 25               vector positions, definitions,
       472-473                          program verification, data-flow             and basic blocks, 219, 220
   order of optimizations, 477-478            analysis for, 261-262              described, 229
   overview, 476-477                    program-dependence graphs                forward structural data-flow
   procedure integration                      (PDGs), 284-286                       analysis, 242-244
       (automatic inlining),               constructing CDGs for, 284-286        interval data-flow analysis,
       465-470                             control-dependent nodes, 284,            249-250
   shrink wrapping, 472, 473-476              286                                 iterative fo rw ard bit-vector
   tail-call and tail-recursion            in instruction scheduling, 723             problem , 218-223
       elimination, 461-465                region nodes, 284, 285                 killing definitions, 2 2 0
procedure parameters, in                “ programming in the large” issues,       preserving definitions, 2 2 0
       interprocedural side-effect            663-664                             u n d ecid ab ility in, 219
       analysis, 637                    Prolog, run-time support, 131-133     read in g flow am o n g ch ap ters in
procedure sorting, 673-676              prologue of procedures, 119-120               this b o o k , 14-16
   algorithm, 673-676                      shrink wrapping and, 472, 473      r e a l ic a n type
   overview, 673                        proper ancestor, 185                     binary operators, 29
   procedure splitting and, 681         proper interval, 204                     overview, 29
850                Subject Index


reassociation. See also algebraic           partial-redundancy elimination,               other issues, 521-524
        simplifications and                    4 0 7 -4 1 5                               overview, 4 8 1 -4 8 2 , 485-486
        reassociation                       reassociation, 4 1 5 -4 1 6                   performance and, 481
    with common-subexpression            region, 175                                      priority-based graph coloring,
        elimination, 385, 4 1 5 -4 1 6   region nodes of PDGs, 284, 285                      524-525
    with loop-invariant code             register allocation, 4 8 1 -5 3 0 , 6 5 9 -      register assignment, 488, 506,
        motion, 415-416                        662. See also interprocedural                 508
    with partial-redundancy                    register allocation; register              register coalescing, 487,
        elimination, 415-41 6                  allocation by graph coloring                  4 9 7 -5 0 0
    redundancy elimination and,             candidates for allocation,                    register pairs, 523, 529
        4 1 5-416                              4 8 3 -4 8 4                               register pressure, 407, 506
receives, m ir instruction type, 75         combining with scheduling, 526                rematerialization, 488, 501,
recompilation, interprocedural              DEC compilers, 730                               509, 5 2 3-524, 529, 530
        issues, 664                         described, 322, 482                           spill costs computation,
re c o rd , (record type constructor),      by graph coloring, 4 8 5 -5 2 4                  4 8 7 -4 8 8 , 501-503
        in ican , 23                        importance of, 481                            spilling symbolic registers, 488,
records                                     instruction scheduling and, 545                  506-511
    data-flow analysis, 258, 259            Intel 386 family compilers, 740               top-level structure, 4 8 6-489
    packed and unpacked, 108                interprocedural, 6 5 9 -6 6 2                 two-address instructions, 499,
    run-time representation, 108            local methods, 4 8 3 -4 8 5                      529
records, in ican                            order of optimizations, 481,                  webs, 486, 4 8 9 -4 9 4
    binary operators, in ican , 34             4 8 2 -4 8 3 , 527-528                  register allocation by priority-based
   constant delimiters (<...>), 27,         other approaches, 525-526                        graph coloring, 524-525
        33                                  overview, 481 -4 8 3                       register assignment
   constants, 33                            power and PowerPC compilers,                  overview, 482
   overview, 33-34                             723                                        register allocation by graph
   type constructor (reco rd                priority-based graph coloring,                   coloring, 488, 506, 508
        23, 26, 33                             5 24-525                                register coalescing, 487, 4 9 7-500
recursion                                   scalar replacement of array                   functions performed by, 499
    in C, aliases and, 301                     elements, 6 8 2 -6 8 7                     ican code for, 498-5 0 0
    in Fortran 90, aliases and,             sparc compilers, 713                          overview, 487, 497-498
        301                                 spur lisp compiler, 525                       power and PowerPC compilers,
    inlining and, 468                    register allocation by graph                        723
    in interprocedural side-effect             coloring, 4 8 5 -5 2 4                  register pairs, in register allocation
        analysis, 637                       adjacency lists, 487, 4 9 6 -4 9 7 ,             by graph coloring, 499, 523,
   in Pascal, aliases and, 300                 4 9 8 ,4 9 9 , 530                            529
   tail-recursion elimination,              adjacency matrixes, 487,                   register pipelining. See scalar
        320-321                                4 9 5 -4 9 6 , 497, 530                       replacement of array elements
reducibility of flowgraphs,                 basic steps, 485                           register pressure, 407, 506
        196-197                             candidates for allocation,                 register renaming, 564 -5 6 7
reductions, loop-invariant code                4 8 9 -4 9 4                               in branch scheduling, 534
        motion, 4 0 6 -4 0 7                degree, 494                                   described, 532, 573
redundancy elimination, 377-423             degree < R rule, 503-506                      determining register sets,
   code hoisting, 4 1 7 -4 2 0              edge splitting, 509                              564-565
   common-subexpression                     examples, 4 8 5 -4 8 6 , 510-521              in extended basic blocks, 565
        elimination, 378-396                heuristics used in register                   ican code, 565, 566
   described, 322                              spilling, 501, 522-523                     loop unrolling and, 561
   loop-invariant code motion,              interference graph, 485, 486,                 order of optimizations, 574-575
        397 -4 0 7                             487, 488, 4 9 4 -4 9 7 , 503-506        register windows, parameter­
   order of optimizations, 327,             interferences, 481                               passing with, 123-126
       4 2 1 -4 2 2                         machine independence, 524                  registers
   overview, 377-378                        NP-completeness, 482                          Alpha integer register names,
   partial-redundancy analysis, 230         order of optimizations, 527-528                  751
                   Subject Index                                                                                 851


      anticipatable, 473                  return values                                     S
      common-subexpression                   call by result parameter-passing
          elimination and, 396                  (run-time), 117                  safe optimizations, 319-320
     contention for, 110-111                 described, 111                      safe positions, in instruction
     DEC Alpha register names, 751        return-jump functions, 637-641                   scheduling, 543
     dividing into classes, 120           reverse extended basic blocks          Santhanam, Vatsa, 662
     flat register file, parameter­          definition, 175                     s a x p y (), Unpack procedure,
         passing in, 121-123                 in instruction scheduling, 598               465-466, 657
     IBM po w er and PowerPC              Richardson, Stephen E., 608, 664       scalar optimizations
         register names, 749-750          R ises                                      future trends, 744
     ica n representation, 82                aggregation of global references,        memory-oriented optimizations
     importance of, 109-110                     663                                        vs., 700
     Intel 386 family register names,        branch architectures, 533           scalar replacement of aggregates,
         752                                 constant propagation and,                     331-333
     issues and objectives, 110                 362-363                               main procedure, 331, 332,
     managing for procedures,                data prefetching, 698                         333
          120- 123                           instruction prefetching, 672             order of optimizations, 372
     pa -r is c register names, 754          machine idioms and instruction           overview, 371
     partial-redundancy elimination             combining, 599-602                    simple example, 331-332
         and, 407                            pipelining, 531                     scalar replacement of array
     register windows, parameter­            register allocation, 483                      elements, 682-687
         passing with, 123-126               register assignment, 482                 examples, 682-683
     run-time usage, 109-111,                register usage, 110                      loop fusion, 684
          121- 126                        Rodeh, M., 548                              loop interchange, 684
     shrink wrapping and, 473-474         Rogers, Anne, 548                           for loop nests with no
     spa r c register names, 748          rolled loop, 559                                conditionals, 683-684
Reif, John R., 348, 729                   Rosen, Barry K., 202, 250                   loops with ifs, 684, 685
related topics not covered in this        Rosenberg, Scott, 768                       for nested loops, 684, 686-687
         book, 16                         Rothberg, Edward E., 738                    order of optimizations, 702-703
relational operators, algebraic           Roubine, Olivier, 52                        overview, 701
         simplifications, 333-334         routines, ic a n naming, 92-95         SCCs. See strongly connected
rematerialization, in register            row-major order for arrays,                     components
         allocation by graph coloring,          107                              scheduling. See instruction
         488, 501,509, 523-524, 529,      run-time stack                                   scheduling
         530                                 overview, 114-116                   Scheme, run-time support,
removal of induction variables,              parameters passed on, 123                     131-133
         447-453                          run-time support, 105-136              Schiffman, Alan M ., 133
     ica n code, 450-453                     Application Binary Interface        scope
     loop invariants and, 449                   (ABI) standards, 105, 134             closed scopes, 52-54
     overview, 447-448                       importance of, 4-6                       defined, 43
     procedure, 448-450                      local stack frames, 111-114              dynamic scoping, 45
     situations where advisable,             parameter-passing disciplines,           global symbol-table
         447                                    116-119                                    management and, 49-54
Renvoise, Claude, 407, 422                   procedure prologues, epilogues,          name scoping, 663
repeat statements                               calls, and returns, 119-126           types of storage classes, 44
     ic a n , 40                             register usage, 109-111                  visibility of variables, 43-44
     lo o p inversion, 587-588               run-time stack, 114-116             scratch registers, 120
reserved w ord s ( ic a n ), 25, 40          shared objects, 127-131             search-variable expansion,
resource vectors, 271                        symbolic and polymorphic                      562-563
results. See return values                      language support, 131-133        select from set operator, unary (♦ ),
r e t u r n , m ir , 76                   Riithing, Oliver, 407, 443, 597                  in ic a n , 24, 27, 31
r e t u r n - , 655                       Ruttenberg, John, 567                  s e l f , run-time support, 131-133
return statem ents ( ic a n ), form, 38   Rymarczyk, J. W., 531, 575             semantic checking, described, 2
852                Subject Index

semantics-directed parsing,             shared objects, 127-131                   software pipelining, 548-569
          159-160                           accessing external variables,            circular scheduling, 565
semidominators, 185                             128, 129                             described, 532
separable array references, 282             advantages, 127                          disambiguating memory
separate compilation                        global offset table (GOT), 129,             references, 551
     interprocedural analysis and               130                                  hierarchical reduction, 568-569
         optimization and, 608              performance impact, 128                  loop unrolling, 532, 559-562
     interprocedural control-flow           position-independent code, 128           for loops containing
         analysis and, 611                  procedure linkage table (PLT),              conditionals, 568-569
separated list operator (x ), in xbnf           130, 131                             most pipelining algorithm, 567
         notation, 19, 20                   semantics of linking, 127-128            order of optimizations, 574-575
separators, in ican , 21                    table of contents example, 128           other approaches, 565-568
sequence instruction, m ir , 76             transferring control between,            overview, 548-551, 573
sequence o f, (sequence type                    129-130                              performance and, 573
         constructor), in ican , 23         transferring control within,             pipeline architectures, 531,
sequence of optimizations. See                 128-129                                  532-533
         order of optimizations         Sharir, Micha, 205, 210                      register pipelining (scalar
sequence types, in ican                 Sharlit, 259-261                                replacement of array
     binary operators, overview,        shrink wrapping, 473-476. See                   elements), 682-687
         32                                    also leaf-routine optimization        register renaming, 532, 564-567
    concatenation operator (©), 24,         example, 474-476                         testing loop iterations, 551
         27, 32                             implementation, 473-474                  unroll-and-compact, 555-558
    constants, 32, 33                       order of optimizations, 477-478          variable expansion, 532,
    constant delimiters ([...]), 24,        overview, 472, 473, A ll                    562-564
         27, 32                         side effects of procedure calls              window scheduling, 551-555
    member deletion operator (©),           flow-insensitive side-effect          software resources, 767-771
         24, 27, 32                            analysis, 619-633                     code-generator generators,
    member selection operator (i),          flow-sensitive side effect                  769-770
         27, 32                                analysis, 634-636                     compilers, 768-769
    overview, 32-33                         other issues in computing, 637           machine simulators, 767-768
sequences, representation, 763          Silberman, Gabriel, 807                      profiling tools, 770-771
s e t of (set type constructor), in     simple loop residue test, 284                the Internet, 767
         ican , 23                      Simpson, Taylor, 355, 414, 443            sorting, local variables in stack
sets                                    single quotation mark character                 frame, 56-58
    operators, 759                             (°/0'), in ican , 29               sources of aliases, 296-297
    representation, 759-763             single-valued, 34                         Spa, 768
    run-time representation, 109        site-independent interprocedural          space, as optimization criterion,
set types, in ican                             constant propagation, 637                320
    binary operators, 31                site-specific interprocedural             SPARC
    constant delimiters ({...}), 27,           constant propagation, 637             architecture, 591, 707-708
         31                             SIV tests, 283                               floating-point register i (#/,f/),
    constants, 31                       size operator ( I... | ), in ican , 24,         748
    intersection operator (n), 27,             2 7 ,3 6                              integer general register i (#/0g/),
         31                             sllic , integer multiply and divide             748
    overview, 31-32                            operands in, 73                       integer in register i (°/,i/), 748
    selection (♦ ), unary operator,     slotwise data-flow analysis,                 integer local register i (%lz), 748
         31-32                                 250-251                               integer out register i (%o/), 748
    union operator (u), 27, 31          Smalltalk, run-time support,                 integer register i (#/,r/'), 748
s g e f a ( ), Linpack procedure,              131-133                               machine simulator, 768
         465-466, 467, 657              Smotherman, Mark, 542                     sparc compilers, 707-716
Shade, 771                              sn o bo l , run-time support,                asm+ code, 711-712
shared compiler components, 9-10               131-133                               assembly code examples,
shared libraries. See shared objects    Soffa, Mary Lou, 525, 530, 700                  713-716
                   Subject Index                                                                                     853


      assembly language, 747-749               heuristics. See register allocation   stack, run-time. See run-time stack
      branch architecture and, 533                by graph coloring                  stack storage class, 44
      code generator phases, 712-713     spilling symbolic registers, 488,           stall cycles, filling, 534-535
     conditional moves, 591                       506-511                            standards
     data prefetching, 698               s p im , 767-768                                 ANSI/IEEE-754 1985, 106, 331
     dependence analysis, 711            SpixTools, 770-771                               Application Binary Interface
     development, 707                    splitting critical edges. See edge                    (ABI), 105, 134
     global optimizer, 710-711                    splitting                               constant folding and, 331
     instruction prefetching, 672        s p u r l is p compiler, register                Unicode, 106
     languages supported, 708                     allocator, 525                     statement separator (;), in ic a n ,
     levels of optimization supported,   Srivastava, Amitabh, 658, 664                         2 1 ,3 7
         710                             SSA form, 252-258. See also                 statements ( ic a n ), 36-40
     mixed model of optimization in,              intermediate code                       assignment statements, 36-38
         9                                    described, 4                                case statements, 25, 39
     optimizer transformations, 711           dominance frontiers, 253-254                described, 24-25
     position-independent code, 713          du-chains in, 252                            for statements, 39-40
     procedure linkage table (PLT),           future trends, 744                          goto statements, 38
         131                                 loop code, 4, 5                              if statements, 38-39
     register windows for successive          in partial-redundancy                       keywords in, 25, 40
         procedures, 125                          elimination, 415                        overview, 36
     stack frame layout with register        in po w er and PowerPC                       procedure call statements, 38
         windows, 126                             compilers, 721                          repeat statements, 40
     Sun IR, 71 ,7 2 , 709-710               pruned, 258                                  return statements, 38
     type checking, 132                      standard translation example,                syntax, 37
     yabe back end, 709-710                       253                                     while statements, 39
sparse conditional constant                  strength reduction on, 443              static branch-prediction methods,
         propagation, 362-371. See           translating into, 252-258,                       598
         also constant propagation                349-350                            static link, 114-116
     algorithm, 364-366                      in value numbering, 349-355                  described, 111, 114
     code for, 364-367                   stack frames. See also parameter­                in procedure descriptors, 126
     constant propagation, 362-363                passing (run-time)                      procedure sorting, 672-673
     examples, 366-371                       dynamic link, 114                           setting, 114-115
     order of optimizations, 372             local symbol tables, 49, 51,                 up-level addressing, 115-116
     overview, 371-372                            52-54, 56-58                       static single-assignment form. See
     repetition of, 13                       local variables in, 56-58                        SSA form
     symbolic program execution,             overview, 111-112                       static storage classes, 44
         363-364                             run-time support, 111-114               s t a t i c variables (C), 44
     transforming the flowgraph into         stack-plus-hashing model,                   procedure integration and, 469
         SSA form, 363                            52-54                              static-semantic validity, described,
     value numbering vs., 343                static link, 114-116                         2
sparse set representation, 762-763           structures for procedure calling,       Steele, Guy L., 525, 530
speculative load, extension to lir                122, 124, 126                      Steenkiste, Peter, 662
     defined, 547                            tail-call elimination and,              Steffen, Bernhard, 407, 443, 597
     o p erato r (< - s p ) , 547, 548           462-463                             storage binding, 54-58
s p e c 92 bench m arks, 567             stack of local symbol tables, 49, 51           addressing method, 54-55
speculative load in g, 547-548               local variables in, 56-58                  described, 54
speculative scheduling, 548                  stack-plus-hashing model,                  large local data structures, 58
     perform ance an d , 573                     52-54                                  symbolic registers, 55-56
     safe and u nsafe, 548, 730          stack pointer (sp), 112-114                    variable categories, 54
     unspecu lation, 548                     a l l o c a ( ) a n d ,113              storage classes of symbol tables,
speed. See perform ance                      described, 110, 112                            43-45
spill co sts co m pu tation , 487-488,       frame pointer vs., 112-113                 automatic or class, 44
         501-503                             tail-call elimination and, 462             file or module, 44
854               Subject Index

storage classes of symbol                  flow functions for if-th e n ,           symbol-table entries, 45-47
        tables (cont.)                           237- 238                           variety in design, 4
   global, 44-45                           flow functions for if- th e n -        symbol-table entries, 45-47
   lifetime of variables, 44                     e ls e , 238                       typical fields, 46
   scope, 43                               flow functions for while,              symbolic execution
   static, 44                                    238- 239                           for jump and return-jump
   visibility of variables, 43-44          forward problems, 236-244                   functions, 641
store operator (<-), in machine            interval analysis compared to,            for sp arse con d ition al co n stan t
        grammars, 139                            249                                     p ro p ag atio n , 372
stores, generating in symbol tables,       reaching-definitions analysis,         sy m bolic lan gu ages, run-time
        59-63                                    242-244                                 su p p o rt, 131-133
Stoutchinin, A., 817                       representing equations, 247-249        sy m bolic registers. See also w ebs
straightening, 583-585                 structural hazards, 271                       ic a n represen tation, 82
   described, 579, 583                 structure of compilers, 1-3                   spillin g, 488, 506-511
    ic a n code, 584-585                   optimizing compilers, 7-11                sto rag e binding, 55-56
   overview, 583-584                        placement of optimizations,           syntactic an alysis. See also parsing
strength reduction, 435-443                      11-14                               co m bining with lexical an alysis,
   algorithm, 436-438                  subscript range operator (• •), in                3
    m ir example, 437-443, 444                   ic a n , 26, 30                     described, 2
   overview, 435-436                   subsumption. See register                     in Fortran, 3
   on SSA form, 443                              coalescing                       syntactic blocks, eliminating
strict dominance, 182                  subtraction operator (-)                          in Graham-Glanville
stride, 670                                in h i r , m i r , and l ir , 74, 75          code-generator generator,
strongly connected components,             in ic a n , 27, 29                             154-158
        193-196                        su ccesso r b asic b lo ck s, 175          syntax
   algorithm, 194-195                      register allo catio n an d , 484          a b stract sy n tax tree, 70-71
   interprocedural data-flow           s u i f , 769                                 x b n f sy n tax o f chan ges to m ir
        analysis, 631-632              Sun compilers. See sp a r c compilers            to m ake h i r , 79
   maximal, 194                        Sun IR, 7 1 ,7 2 , 709-710                    x b n f sy n tax o f chan ges to m ir
   natural loops, 191-193              supergraph, 634                                  to m ake l ir , 80
strongly distributive, 236             superscalar implementations                   x b n f sy n tax o f m ir instructions,
structural control-flow analysis,          percolation scheduling for, 574              74
        202-214                            scheduling for, 543-545                   x b n f syntax of m ir programs
   acyclic and cyclic control              software pipelining and, 548                 and program units, 74
        structures, 202-204,               trace scheduling for, 574              syntax ( ic a n )
        207-208                        superscript operators, in x b n f            conventions, 21
   advantages, 173                               notation, 19-20                     declarations, 26-27
   algorithm, 205-206                  support of a function, 637                   expressions, 27
   data structures, 205, 208-209,      symbol names, procedure                      generic simple constants, 28
      211-212                                    integration and, 469                statements, 37
  example, 210-214                     symbol tables, 43-65                          type definitions, 25-26
  global data structures, 205              compiler structure diagrams              whole programs, 25
  interval analysis compared to,                 and, 3                           syntax-directed code generators.
      202                                  generating loads and stores,                 See Graham-Glanville
   preorder traversal, 207                       59-63                                  code-generator generator
   region-reduction routine, 207,         g lo b al sym bol-table structure,
      209-210                                49-54                                             T
   smallest improper region               local symbol-table management,
      determination, 210, 211                47-49                                tail call, defined, 461
structural data-flow analysis,            run-time and, 114                       tail merging
      236-249                             storage binding, 54-58                      described, 580
   backward problems, 244-247             storage classes, 43-45                      order of optimizations, 604
   described, 236                         symbol attributes, 45-47                    overview, 590-591
                  Subject Index                                                                                       855


 tail-call optimization, 461-465       trees                                           syntax, 25-26
     addressing modes and, 465            balanced binary trees, 48, 761,              tuples, 33
     effect of, 461-463                      763                                       unions, 34
    identifying tail calls, 463           intermediate code form, 97-100            type determination, data-flow
    implementation, 463-465               Polish prefix form, 101                         analysis for, 262-263
    order of optimizations, 477           quadruples vs., 98
    overview, 476                         representation, 763-764                                U
    stack frames and, 462-463             translation from quadruples,
tail-recursion elimination, 461-463          98- 99                                 u c o d e , design issues using, 67-68
    effect of, 461                        tran slatio n to q u ad ru p les,         ud-chains, 251
    implementation, 463                       9 9 - 100                                determining dead code, 593
    importance of, 320-321             trends in compiler design, 744               Ullman, Jeffrey D., 227, 351
    order of optimizations, 477        triples                                      unary operators
    overview, 476                         interm ediate co de form , 96-97             algebraic simplifications, 333
tail-recursive call, defined, 461         q u ad ru p les vs., 96                      m i r , 75
target-machine code, examples in          tran slatio n to q u ad ru p les, 97      unary operators ( ic a n )
        this book, 16                  true dependence. See flow                       negation, 28
Tarjan, Robert E., 185, 631, 738             dependence                                set types, 24, 31
temporaries, described, 111            tuple types, in ic a n                       unconstrained greedy schedule,
Tenenbaum, Aaron, 287                     binary o p erato rs, 33                          555-556
terminals, in x b n f notation, 19        co n stan t delim iters (<...>), 27       Unicode, run-time support, 106
thunk, 118                                co n stan ts, 33                          unification. See code hoisting
tiling. See loop tiling                   element selection operator (@),           unified or combined cache, 670
Tjiang, Steven S. K., 160, 259, 260,         24, 27, 33                             uniform register machine, 163
        265                               type constructor (x), 23, 26, 28,         unify transformation, 571-572
TLB. See translation-lookaside               33                                     unimodular loop transformations,
        buffer (TLB)                   tu ples, in ic a n                                  690-693
t o b e y , back end o f po w er and       h ir in stru ctio n s, represen tation      loop interchange, 691
        PowerPC compilers, 719-723            a s, 87                                  loop permutation, 691
tokens, in ic a n , 2 2                   l ir instructions, representation            loop reversal, 692
top, of lattices, 223. See also              as, 91-92                                loop skewing, 692-693
        lattices                          m ir instructions, representation           overview, 690-691
Torczon, Linda, 469, 495, 637,              as, 82-84                               unimodular matrixes, 690-693
        664, 762                       twig, 160-165                                unions, in interprocedural
Towle, Robert A., 289                  tw o-ad d ress in stru ction s in register          side-effect analysis, 637
trace, defined, 569                          allo catio n by g rap h co lorin g ,   union types (C), aliases and,
trace scheduling, 569-570                    499, 529                                      300
    compensation code, 569             type definitions ( i c a n )                 union ty pes, in ic a n
    described, 532, 569                   array s, 30                                 bin ary o p e ra to rs, 34
    example, 569-570                      compiler-specific types, 24, 35             overview , 34
    order of optimizations, 532,          constructed types, 28                       type constructor (u), 23, 26, 28,
        574                               described, 23, 28                              34
    performance and, 570                  enumerated types, 29-30                   universal quantifier (V), in ic a n ,
translation-lookaside buffer (TLB)        floating-point numbers, 81                     27, 28
    described, 670                        functions, 34-35                          unnecessary bounds-checking
    misses and stride values, 670         generic simple types, 23, 28-29                elimination, 454-457
tree edges, 178                           integers, 81                                implementation, 455-457
tree-pattern-matching code                n i l value, 24, 35                         importance of, 454-455
        generation. See dynamic           operator (=), 25, 26, 35                    languages requiring, 454
        programming                       records, 33-34                              order of optimizations, 458
tree transformations, for                 sequences, 32-33                            overview, 458-459
        simplification of addressing      sets, 31-32                               unpacked records, 108
        expressions, 337-341              size operator, 36                         unreachable code, defined, 580
856               Subject Index

unreachable-code elimination,              induction variables, 562-563          register allocation by graph
       580- 582                            order of optimizations, 574-575           coloring, 486, 489-494
   algorithm, 580-581                      search variables, 562-563             spill costs computation,
   dead-code elimination vs., 580      variables                                     487-488, 501-503
   described, 579, 580                     addressing method in symbol         Wegman, Mark N., 348, 355, 363
   ic a n code, 581                            tables, 54-55                   Weihl, William E., 612, 637
   m ir procedure example,                 congruence of, 348-351              Weicker, Reinhold P., 121
       581- 582                            dead, 445, 592-592                  Weinstock, Charles B., 820
   repetitions of, 579                     induction variables, 425-426        well-behaved loops in C, 425
unroll-and-compact software                induction-variable                  well-structured flowgraph, 196
       pipelining, 555-558                     optimizations, 425-453          while statements
   algorithm to find repeating             lifetimes of variables, 44            flow functions for structural
       pattern, 557-558                    live and dead, 443, 445                   analysis, 238-239
   overview, 555-557                       live variables analysis, 229,         ic a n form, 39
   unconstrained greedy schedule,              443-446                           loop inversion, 587-588
       555-556                             local variables in stack frame,     whitespace, in ic a n , 21
unrolling. See loop unrolling                  56-58                           Whitfield, Debbie, 700
unrolling factor, 559                      procedure-valued,                   window scheduling, 551-555
unspeculation. See speculative                 interprocedural control-flow      algorithm, 552-553
       scheduling                              analysis with, 612-618            combining with loop unrolling,
unswitching, 580, 588-589                  procedure-valued variables, 126           553, 555
up-level addressing, 115-116               register use by, 111                  overview, 551-552
upwards-exposed uses                       in shared objects, 128              Wolf, Michael E., 289, 690, 698,
   analysis, 229-230                       storage-binding categories, 54            738
   in instruction scheduling, 542          up-level addressing, 115-116        Wolfe, Michael R., 694, 700
user environment, described, 3             visibility of symbol-table          word, usage in this book, 16-17
                                               variables, 43-44                worklist algorithm for iterative
           V                           VAX compiler, a s c ii support, 106           data-flow analysis, 232-233
                                       very busy expressions, 417              write-live dependence, 571
value graphs of procedures,            Vick, Christopher, 443                  Wulf, William, 730
      349-351                          v liw (very long instruction word
value numbering, 343-355                       systems), 548, 562, 566, 570,               X
   applied to basic blocks, 344-348            574, 575, 576
                                                                               x b n f . See Extended Backus-Naur
   applied to extended basic blocks,   visibility, of variables, 43-44
      344                              v o l a t i l e storage class, 45            Form (x b n f )
   described, 343                                                              XIL code, 719-721
   global, 348-355                                                             X L compilers. See po w er and
                                                  W
   optimizations with similar                                                       PowerPC compilers
      effects, 343                     Wall, David W., 658, 659-662, 664
                                                                                           Y
   order of optimizations, 372         “ wand waving” , in p o w er and
   overview, 371, 372                        PowerPC compilers, 722            YIL code, 721
   very aggression version in          Warren, S. K., 806
      IBM p o w e r and PowerPC        WARTS, 770                                          Z
      compilers, 722                   weakly separable array references,
variable declarations ( ic a n )             282, 283                          Zadeck, F. Kenneth, 250, 348, 355,
   described, 81                       webs. See also symbolic registers            363, 525, 530
   overview, 23                           data-flow analysis, 251-252          zero distance (=), in direction
   syntax, 26-27                          defined, 486                              vectors, 278
variable expansion, 562-564               example, 489                         zero or m ore co pies operator, unary
   accumulator variables, 562-564         interferences among, 490                   p ostfix (*), in x b n f n otation,
   algorithms, 563                        priority-based graph coloring,             19, 20
   described, 532, 573                       524-525                           Ziv, Isaac, 807
