By Acodemy
© Copyright 2015
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced – mechanically,
electronically, or by any other means, including photocopying without the
permission of the publisher
   LEARN PYTHON IN A DAY
The Ultimate Crash Course to Learning the
       Basics of Python in No Time
Disclaimer
The information provided in this book is designed to provide helpful information on the subjects discussed.
The author’s books are only meant to provide the reader with the basics knowledge of a certain topic,
without any warranties regarding whether the student will, or will not, be able to incorporate and apply all
the information provided. Although the writer will make his best effort share his insights, learning is a
difficult task and each person needs a different timeframe to fully incorporate a new topic. This book, nor
any of the author’s books constitute a promise that the reader will learn a certain topic within a certain
timeframe.
Table of Contents
Chapter 1: Introduction
  What is Python and why learn it?
  Installation
  Your First “Hello World” Program
  Running Code Interactively VS Running Scripts
  Variables and Datatypes
  Basic Operators
     Arithmetic Operators
     Comparison Operators
     Assignment Operators
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 2: Sequences
  What are sequences?
    Accessing sequence items through indexing
     Splitting sequences
     Negative indexing
  Working with lists
  Working with strings
    String formatting
  Summary
  Exercises
Chapter 3: Collections
  Sets
  Dictionaries
  Working with Sets
  Working with Dictionaries
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 4: Conditionals
  If Statements
  If-else Statements
  Receiving user input
  Elif Statements
  Inline if
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 5: Loops
  What are loops?
  For-loop
  While-loop
  List Comprehensions
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 6: Custom Functions
  What are custom functions?
  Defining and calling a function
  Functions with multiple parameters
  Functions with default parameters
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 7: Classes
  What are classes?
  Defining a class
  Inheritance
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 8: Modules and Packages
  What are modules?
  What are packages?
  Working with modules and packages
    Installing external modules and packages
  Code introspection
  Creating your own module
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 9: File Handling
  Opening a file with Python
     Reading a text file
     Writing inside a text file
     Creating a new text file
    Reading, writing and creating new binary files
  Handling files easier with "with"
  Working with directories
     Changing the current working directory and creating new ones
     Deleting files and directories
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 10: Other Advanced Functionalities
  About this chapter
  Commenting you code
  Errors and Exceptions
     Handling exceptions
  Database handling
  Regular expressions
    Matching more than one pattern
  Summary
  Assignment
Chapter 11: Conclusion
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter objectives: You will learn what Python is.
       You will be able to understand why Python is a good programming
      language to learn and what Python is used for.
       You will learn how to install the latest version of Python You will write
      your first Python program.
       You will understand how to run Python code lines interactively and also
      how to create Python scripts.
       You will learn how to declare variables in Python and how to assign
      different data types to them.
       You will be able to perform basic math operations and get the expected
      output.
What is Python and why learn it?
Python is a high-level programming language that was conceived in the late
1980s and implemented in 1989. Python is widely used for a wide range of
applications which are:
            Web and internet development
            Database access
            Creating desktop graphical interfaces
            Scientific and numeric
            Education
            Network programming
            Software and game development
Python is strongly labeled as an extremely readable language, and it often stands
out of other programming language due to its distinct syntax which allows us
programmers, and prospective programmers to write programs and scripts in
very few lines of code. Its readability and efficiency has made Python a very
popular language which has reflected to an increase in job demand.




                          Python is a pure object-oriented language meaning that
Figure 1: Trend for Python jobs (UK)
the language is designed based on objects. In Python, everything is an object and
every object has attributes and methods. Being an object-oriented programming
language includes Python in the stack of the modern programming languages
that consume most of the programming industry today.
Python is a cross-platform language designed to work the same in every
computer operating system. Because Python has become such a popular
programming language, it boasts a broad community that supports it. That has
led to the development of numerous Python libraries which support different
science and technology fields, from bioinformatics, to web scrapping, to
earthquakes.
To conclude, we could say that the name Python was inspired from the Monty
Python comedy show with the desire to make Python a language that is fun to
use. And it was a very successful shot. Writing Python code is very playful.
Python is by all means an ideal language for beginners.
Installation
Python is not only easy to learn, but it is also a breeze to install it. The official
Python website https://www.python.org/ contains the latest Python installer
available for download for various platforms including Windows, Linux and
Mac OS X. The latest version of Python at the time this book was written was
3.4.3. You can download your Python installer from the downloading page of
the official Python webpage: https://www.python.org/downloads/




Figure 2: Downloading Python 3.4.3

Once you have downloaded Python 3.4.3, double click it and the installer will
guide you through the installation steps.
                                     A good practice is to enable the option to run
Figure 3: Screenshot of the Python installation process
Python from your command line. To be able to do that, you should select Entire
feature will be selected on local drive in the Customize Python 3.4.3 window as
showing in the following picture.
                                          Clicking Next should smoothly take you
Figure 4: Enabling Python to be called from the command line
to the end of the installation. Once you have finished the installation, Python
should be up and running and ready for your code:
Figure 5: Python should be listed along with your other programs
Your First “Hello World” Program
At this point, we have installed Python in our computer and we are more than
ready to start creating our first program. A good practice that will kick start your
understanding on how to write a program in Python is to write a very simple and
famous program called "Hello World!". What this program will do is simply
printing out the "Hello World!" text on the screen.
To start writing the code of our program, let’s go ahead and open up the Python
interactive console called IDLE (Interactive DeveLopment Environment):




Once you open it, all you need to write for this first program is this single line of
code: print("Hello World!")
Once you write the code, hit Enter on your keyboard, and you shall see the
output just below the code you wrote: What happened in the background is that
the built-in Python print function fetched the text that we passed in the brackets,
and did what is programmed to do which is printing it out on the screen.
This is the interactive way of writing Python code. In the next section, you will
learn another method to write code, and also understand the benefits of each of
the methods.
Running Code Interactively VS Running Scripts
The window where we wrote the code for our "Hello World!" program in the
previous section is the shell of the IDLE (Interactive DeveLopment
Environment) platform. Using the IDLE shell is a great way to learn Python and
test things as you write them. You simply need to press Enter to execute a line of
code. However, when you are ready to start writing a bit more complicated
programs that are more demanding in terms of code amount that you write, you
will have to write this code inside a more notepad-like environment. This allows
you as a programmer to flawlessly write blocks of code and then execute the
entire block at once.
Let's say we want to make our "Hello World!" program more "complicated" by
adding one more line of code in it. If we would do it the interactive way through
the IDLE shell, we would write the first line: print("Hello World!")
We would hit Enter after that, see the output, and then write the second line:
print("End of the Program") And we would press Enter again to execute. As you can
see this resembles more to a testing scenario, rather than executing a unified
program. If you instead, would like to write the entire code all at once, and then
execute all the lines with a single button, you would have to use an editor, and
IDLE does offer an editor too. This requires that you create a Python .py file
where to write your code. You can create such a file from IDLE by going to File
-> New File.
Figure 6: Creating a new Python file from IDLE

This will create a new file under a .py extension. Once you have created your
file, you can start writing your code in the editor:




                                In the editor, you can write as much code as you
Figure 7: Writing code inside the IDLE editor
want and then execute by going to Run -> Run Module, or even easier by just
pressing the F5 key. If you haven't saved the file yet, you will be asked to save
the file first in your computer before Python executes it. Once you do that, the
code will run and you will see the interactive window popping up and showing
the output of your code which in this case should be something like this:
                                                  As you can see, the code we
Figure 8: Output displayed in IDLE after running the code from the editor
wrote printed out two lines of code one after the other.
There are other editors out there that you can use to write your code. However,
Python IDLE is a great editor to start. It is simple, light, flexible and it comes
with the default installation of Python.
To conclude, we could say that the interactive environment and the editor are
both very useful, with the former being a best option for testing while the latter
is used whenever you want to write, store and execute blocks of Python code.
Variables and Datatypes
A variable in Python, just like in other programming languages is a storage
location symbolized with a name given by the programmer. Variables are
designed to contain a value which can change depending on the actions you
write in your code.
The value that a variable can hold may be of various data types. To create a
variable that holds a float datatype, simply type in a name for the variable, use
the assignment operator, and then type in the value you want to assign to your
variable: version = 3.4

Tip: Whether you write version = 3.4 or version=3.4, Python doesn't care.
Spaces are not of any importance, unless when used for indentation which is an
aspect that you will learn later in the book.
If you want to check the value of your variable, simply pass in the variable name
to the printing function: print(version)
Tip: When we passed in text to the print function, we used quotes. When you
pass in a variable or other object that is not text, you don’t use quotes.
The code output you should see is the value that variable version currently holds:
3.4


In case you want another value for the variable, you should reassign a new
value: version = "Latest"

Of course, if you try to print out the variable now, you shall see the new value as
your code output.
Let's now focus on the various data types that you can use in Python. Quite
frankly, we already introduced two different datatypes in this section. The first
one was a float, and the second was a string.
A float which is short of floating point number is basically a decimal number.
The number 3.4 in our example was a float datatype.
A string is a sequence of characters. Strings are normally used to express text.
The word "Latest" in our example above was a string datatype.
These two belong to the basic datatypes available in Python. As you work with
Python, you will learn and practice other complicated datatypes. However, for
now, we will stick to the simple built-in datatypes. The other datatypes to be
mentioned are integers, lists, tuples, sets and dictionaries.
Here is how an integer looks like: version_year = 2015

Integers are like whole numbers, but they include negative numbers as well. As
you see, there are scenarios like this one above where you will need to use an
integer.
In case you want to check the datatype of your variable, simply use the type
built-in function which will print out the datatype of the value that the variable is
holding: type(version_year)
And you should get this output: <type 'int'>
which indicates that the datatype of the variable version_year is an integer.
Strings, integers, and floats are some of the built-in datatypes. Other built-in
datatypes that you have to know about are lists, tuples, sets and dictionaries.
These are datatypes that are compound datatypes in the sense that they can
contain sequences or collections of other datatypes. For example, let's start by
defining a list: python_list = [1989, 3.4, "Latest"]

The word python_list is simply a variable name. What's after the assignment
operator is what we refer to as a Python list. As you see, a list is made of a
sequence of items separated by commas. Each item of the list has its own
datatype. For example, the item 1989 is an integer, 3.4 is a float, and "Latest" is
a string. All of them together enclosed in square brackets make a list. Lists are
very important and they will follow you everywhere if you decide to make
Python your programming weapon in your specific industry. Therefore, we will
dedicate a separate section to lists later on in the book.
Let's now jump into tuples. A tuple just like a list is a sequence of items. The
difference between tuples and lists is that lists are mutable, but tuples are not.
Once you have defined a list, you can add, remove or modify its items. The same
is not true for tuples. Creating a tuple follows the same concept as with lists, but
here you need to use round brackets to let Python understand that you are
creating a tuple: python_tuple = (1989, 3.4, "Latest") Both lists and tuples are indexed
sequences meaning that each item is associated to an index starting from zero.
This allows an item to be accessed via its index.
Sets are another datatype that resembles lists and tuples. However, unlike lists
and tuples, sets are unordered collections of items. That means no indexing is
associated to the items of a set. The syntax of creating a set involves the use of
curly brackets: python_set = {1989, 3.4, "Latest"}

A unique feature of sets is that they do not allow duplicate items. This can be
very useful when you need to handle data that require collections of unique
items. Practically, you might have to use a set when you already have a list that
has duplicate items such as this one: python = {1989, 3.4, "Latest", "Latest"}

If you would want to have a list that is clean of duplicates, you could convert the
list to a set using the set function: python = set(python)
Basically, what is happening in this line of code is that the old value of the
variable python, is changed to the new value generated by the set function. Here,
the old value is a list, and the new value is a set. We could now print out the new
variable value: print(python)
That would give this output: {3.4, 1989, 'Latest'}

As you see, this is a set object and there are no duplicate items here anymore. In
case you want to retain the datatype of your original object, which is a list, you
could convert the set back to a list using the list function and print it out to check
what you've got: python = list(python) print(python)
The output you should expect is a list: [3.4, 1989, 'Latest']

And this time we have a list without any duplicate item.
Dictionaries are yet another compound datatype. Just like sets, dictionaries are
also unordered collections of items. Dictionaries have a very distinct feature that
makes them special. Each item in a dictionary is associated to a custom key.
That makes a dictionary a collection of pairs of keys and values. To illustrate it,
let's look at the following example: python_dict = {"year":1989, "version":3.4,
"generation":"Latest"}


The dictionary keys here are year, version, and generation, and their
corresponding values are 1989, 3.4, and Latest, respectively. Each dictionary
value can be later accessed using its corresponding key, but this something that
we will consume later on in the book.
Basic Operators
There are a few types of basic operators in Python which you need to know
about. They are the arithmetic operators, comparison operators, and assignment
operators.

          Arithmetic Operators
Arithmetic operators are the same operators which you have been learning in
elementary school and they are addition, subtraction, multiplication, division,
modulus, exponent, and floor division. Using these operators in Python is very
easy. Let's create two variables here, assign a value to each of them and them use
the addition operator to add them up: a = 3
b = 3.5
a+b


The output you will get is simply the sum of a and b: 6.5

You could even choose to store the result in a third variable, and then simply call
that variable to get the output: c = a + b c

And Python will produce the same value again: 6.5
Because Python is a very straightforward programming language, it is often used
as a calculator for daily routine tasks. All you need to do is open the Python
IDLE and start typing your mathematical operations without the need to write
variables. For example, by just typing in the numbers directly: 3 + 3.5

Once you press Enter you get the expected sum: 6.5

Similarly, you can use any other math operators. The following table gives a
summary of available arithmetic operators that you can use in Python:
   Operator       Operator Name    Example        Output
    symbol


                     Addition        5+2             7
          +
                 Subtraction               5-2               3
      -


                Multiplication             5*2               10
     *


                  Division                 5/2               2.5
      /


                  Modulus                  5%2               1
     %


                  Exponent                 5 ** 2            25
     **


                Floor Division             5 // 2            2
     //



     Comparison Operators
Comparison operators are used to compare two values. Here is a simple example
of the greater than operator: 5 > 2

And the output you will get is: True
Comparison operators are often used in conditional blocks where a statement is
evaluated and different actions are performed depending on whether that
statement was evaluated to True or False.
The following summary gives a complete list of available comparison operators
in Python:
  Operator    Operator           Example            Output
   symbol        name


                 Equal         5 == 2          False
    ==


               Not equal       5 != 2          True
     !=


       >      Greater than     5>2             True


       <       Less than       5<2             False


     >=        Greater or      5 >= 2          True
                equal to


     <=       Less than or     5 <= 2          False
                equal to


       Assignment Operators
Lastly, let's focus on assignment operators. While there are a few assignment
operators, only one of them is the most used one. And that is the assignment
operator "=" which you already know now. The assignment is used to assign a
value to a variable: v = [1,2,3]

Here we just assign a list to variable v.
Tip: The assignment operator = should not be confused with the equal operator
==. The former is used to assign a value to a variable, while the latter is used to
check if two values are the same or not.
There are also derivatives to the assignment operator. One of them is the add
and operator. Here is an example: a = 2
a+=3


And the output would be this: 5

The previous code is the same as this: a = 2
a=a+3


So, what the += operator is doing is adding up the left hand operand with the
right hand operand and assigning the sum to the left hand operand.
The following table provides a full list of assignment operators that you can use
in Python:
  Operator
              Operator Name       Example         Output
   symbol



     =          Assignment          a=5              5




                                    a=5
     +=          Addition
                                   a += 2
                                                     7




                                    a=5
     -=         Subtraction
                                    a -= 2
                                                     3




                                    a=5
     *=        Multiplication
                                   a *= 2
                                                    10




                                    a=5
     /=           Division
                                    a /= 2
                                                    2.5




                                    a=5
    %=           Modulus
                                   a %= 2
                                                     1




                                    a=5
    **=          Exponent
                                   a **= 2
                                                    25




                                    a=5
     //=       Floor Division
                                   a //= 2
                                                     2
Summary
In this chapter, you were introduced to the Python programming language with
the focus on what the language is used for and why it is a good idea to learn it.
You also learned how to install Python on your operating system.
Moreover, we presented the two methods of how to write Python code – the
interactive shell method and the editor method. You were able to understand
when to use each of the two methods to write your Python code.
Further, you wrote your first Python program, once in the Python IDLE shell,
and once in the IDLE editor, and learned how easy it is to execute the code and
get the output.
You also learned how to create a variable and how to assign different values of
different datatypes.
Lastly, we discussed different basic operators that you can use in Python and you
were provided with some full lists of Python operators along with examples for
each operator.
Assignment
Exercise 1
Various examples of different datatypes are given in the left column of the
following table. Write the corresponding datatype in the right column. The first
row is an example.


 Datatype example                                           Datatype name
 1000                                                       Integer
 [0,11,22,33]
 {"Name":"John Smith","Age":95,"Profession":"Archer"}
 ("Diameter","Radius","Perimeter")
 1000.0
 80.855
 "John Smith"
 {"Temperature","Wind speed",Wind direction"}



Exercise 2
Look at the Python code on the left column and write down the output you
would expect if those lines of code are executed. You can either respond
directly, or you can try the code in Python if you are unsure of the output. Again,
the first row is just an example.


 Operation                                                  Output
 a=3
                                                            4
 print (a + 1)
 a=3
 a == 3
 a=3
 a += 10
 print(a)
 a=3
 a += 3.3
 type(a)
 [1,23,33] == (1,23,33)
10**2 + 10**2
a = (1,2,3)
b = list(a)
print(b)


Solution for Exercise 1

Datatype example                                       Datatype name
1000                                                   Integer
[0,11,22,33]                                           List
{"Name":"John Smith","Age":95,"Profession":"Archer"}   Dictionary
("Diameter","Radius","Perimeter")                      Tuple
1000.0                                                 Float
80.855                                                 Float
"John Smith"                                           String
{"Temperature","Wind speed",Wind direction"}           Set


Solution for Exercise 2

Operation                                              Output
a=3
                                                       4
print (a + 1)
a=3
                                                       True
a == 3
a=3
a += 10                                                13
print(a)
a=3
a += 3.3                                               <class 'float'>
type(a)
[1,23,33] == (1,23,33)                                 False
10**2 + 10**2                                          200
a = (1,2,3)
b = list(a)                                            [1,2,3]
print(b)
Chapter 2: Sequences
Chapter objectives:
       You will be introduced to an extremely useful Python datatype category
      – sequences, which include lists, tuples and strings.
       You will learn how to extract a particular item from a sequence using
      indexing.
       You will also learn how to extract a portion from a sequence using index
      slicing.
       You will learn how to access list and tuple element via indexing.
       You will deepen your knowledge about lists by performing list
      operations using list methods.
       You will understand the usefulness of strings and how they can be used
      to handle and format text as you like
What are sequences?
You already learned now the datatypes that belong to the family of sequences.
These were lists, tuples, and strings. Again, here is an example of a list: ls =
["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]


An example of a tuple: tp = ("Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun") And a string: st =
"Friday"


As you can see, a sequence is just an array of objects in the case of lists and
tuples, or an array of characters in the case of strings. Sequences allow us to
store multiple values in one single variable in an organized and easily
manageable manner. We say "manageable" because there is a hidden structure
rule under all these sequence datatypes. This rule is referred to as indexing.

      Accessing sequence items through indexing
Let's suppose we want to know what the value of the third element of our list is.
To access that element, we need to know its position in the list, and Python
offers an index notation that start from zero and increases by one from left to
right. Therefore, the hidden indexes of our list would look like this: ls =
["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]
   0123456


So, if we need to extract the third item of the list, we would write this code: ls[2]
And that would output this string: 'Wed'
And of course you can store the extract in a new variable if you need to use that
string for further operations: third_day = ls[2]
Tuples and strings work under the same index notation. Let's access the third
items of both the ts tuple and the st string under a single printing function:
print(tp[2] + st[2]) And that would output this: Wedi which was generated by the
concatenation of the string Wed and the string i. Sometimes you may want to
extract a portion of a sequence, and not just one single element. That is referred
to as splitting and Python has a specific syntax for that too.

      Splitting sequences
Accessing a portion of a sequence is also very straightforward. The notation for
splitting is this: ls[start:stop]
The start element here is the index of the first item that is to be included in the
split, while stop is the index of the item where the portion stops, and this item is
not included in the split. Let's illustrate it with an example, by first reminding
you of our ls list: ls = ["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]
ls[2:4]


This would output a smaller list: ['Wed', 'Thu']
which is a the portion of the ls list including only the items with index 2 and 3.
The same works with tuples: tp[2:4]
('Wed', 'Thu')
And so does it with strings: st[2:4]
'nd'


          Negative indexing
We could access the third item of our list: ls = ["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]

by just writing the index of that item. However, when you want to access an item
that is near the end of the list, it can be a bit frustrating to count from left to
right. Nothing to worry though – Python has a solution to this problem and that
is negative indexing. Negative indexing is a second underlying index notation
that specifies indexes starting from -1, and decreasing by one from right to left.
Here is how negative indexing would look like: ls =
["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]
   -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1
That means, if we want the last item, we'd better use the negative index of -1
than the positive 6: ls[-1]
And that would give us the last string of the list: 'Sun'
Negative indexing works exactly the same with tuples and strings too and it can
be very useful with sequences that have many items stored in them.
Moreover, you can use negative indexing for splitting too. To extract the string
Fri and Sat, you would have to write this code: l[-3:-1]
and that would generate this: ['Fri', 'Sat']
And in case you're wondering how to extract the last two items of the list, the
answer is this: l[-2:]
which would output this: ['Sat', 'Sun']
So, if you don't pass any index after the colon, the rest of the sequence is
included in the extract. This would work basically the same with positive
indexing. Let's extract the first two items of our list: l[:2]
And we would get what we want: ['Mon', 'Tue']
This kind of slicing is often referred to as shorthand slicing.
Working with lists
Unlike tuples, lists are mutable. That means we can add, remove or modify items
of a list. The way you modify an object in general, in Python is to call the object,
use a dot notation, and then call the method that applies to that object, and then
pass an argument to that method. Generally the syntax looks like this:
object.method(argument) Let's illustrate this by removing the last item from our
ls list and print out the updated list: ls = ["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]
ls.remove("Sun") print(ls)
So, to remove an item, we use the list remove method. And the output to be
expected is this: ['Mon', 'Tue', 'Wed', 'Thu', 'Fri', 'Sat']
If you changed your mind about Sunday, let's append the item again to the end of
the list using the append method: ls.append("Sun") print(ls)
This will update the list to this again: ['Mon', 'Tue', 'Wed', 'Thu', 'Fri', 'Sat', 'Sun']

Sometimes, you might want to check what index a specific item is associated
with. For that, we use the index method: ls.index("Wed")
And that would return: 2

which is the index of the Wed item.
And if you want to append more than one item to your list use the extend
method: ls.extend(["Mon","Tue"]) And that would output this longer list: ['Mon', 'Tue',
'Wed', 'Thu', 'Fri', 'Sat', 'Mon', 'Tue']


In case you want to count the occurrence of a specific item of the list, simply use
the count method: ls.count("Tue")
And that would output: 2

which indicates that there are Tue in the list.
And if you want to know the total number of items in a list, use the len function
which stands for length: len(ls)
And that would produce this result: 8
That means the ls list has eight items.
And lastly, you can add any item at any position in the list by using the insert
method which syntax is as follows: ls.insert(index,item)
And to illustrate it, let's add the string Sun at position -2: ls.insert(-2,"Sun") And
that would give us this outpu: ['Mon', 'Tue', 'Wed', 'Thu', 'Fri', 'Sat', 'Sun', 'Mon',
'Tue']
These are some of the methods that you really need to know about.
Tip: For a full list of available list methods, simply type dir(list) in your Python
shell and you will get a complete list of methods that you can apply to a list.
Working with strings
Strings are also sequences, but they differ from lists in the sense that the
methods to manipulate strings are somewhat different. You cannot apply some
of the list methods to a string, such as append, remove, insert, and expand, but
you can apply the count method to count the occurrence of a specific character in
the string.
Nevertheless, splitting strings would work the same as list. Let's take the string:
file = "File.txt"
Splitting this string would work the same: ext = file[-4:]
which would output the last four characters of the string: '.txt'
A distinct aspect of working with strings is the feature of string formatting.

     String formatting
String formatting in Python is all about formatting text the way you want it. Let's
suppose a scenario where we a collection of names in a database, and we want to
construct some email addresses of a name@example.com format out of these
names. We would first have to get each name into a Python variable, so let's
suppose we have done that and we have our first variable: name = "John"

Now, we need some sort of functionality to generate a full email address string
by grabbing the value of variable name. And this functionality is provided by the
format method. Let's see how we would work around this: "
{0}@{1}.com".format(name,"example") So, we have a string inside the double quotes,
and we have two placeholders denoted by curly brackets. These two
placeholders are waiting to be replaced by whatever is found inside the format
method. To understand it better, let's have a look at the output: 'John@example.com'

As you see, the first placeholder was replaced by the value of the variable name
and the second by the string example. String formatting is very important when
you iterate through a lot of data and you want to generate a string with a
predefined format such as the one above.
Summary
In this chapter you deepened your knowledge on sequences, particularly with
lists, tuples, and strings. You learned how to access a particular item or a
particular portion of a list, tuple or string. You were able to do such extracting
operations using both positive and negative indexing.
Further, you learned how to perform various operations with lists. This involved
several methods that can be applied to a list object using the dot notation. You
were also able to understand some differences between lists and strings.
Specifically, you learned how to do string formatting and how string formatting
comes in handy when manipulating text.
Exercises
Exercise 1
Consider this Python list: li = ["USA","Mexico","Canada"]
Keeping list li in mind, write the correct Python code in the right hand side of
the table that would generate the output on the right.
                            Output                                             Code
 ['USA', 'Mexico', 'Canada', 'Greenland']                       li.append("Greenland")
 ['USA', 'Mexico', 'Canada']
 ['Greenland', 'USA', 'Mexico', 'Canada']
 ['Greenland', 'USA']
 ['Mexico', 'Canada']
 ['USA', 'Mexico']



Exercise 2
Consider this list:
li = ["USA","Mexico","Canada","Greenland"]


With a single line of code that applies to list li, try to produce the following
result: 'Green'

Hint: Use indexing to access the last item of the list, and just after that, use
indexing again to access the first five character of the extracted string.
Exercise 3
Create a new empty .py file, and type in the following code in the file: ls = [7, 31,
365]
"A week has {} days, the longest month has {}, while the longest Julian year has {}"


As you see, the second line of the above script is incomplete. Complete it so that
when you run the script, it produces the following output: 'A week has 7 days, the
longest month has 31, while the longest Julian year has 365'



Solution for Exercise 1
 Output                                                  Code
 ['USA', 'Mexico', 'Canada', 'Greenland']                li.append("Greenland")
 ['USA', 'Mexico', 'Canada']                             li.remove("Greenland")
 ['Greenland', 'USA', 'Mexico', 'Canada']                li.insert(0,"Greenland")
 ['Greenland', 'USA']                                    li[:2]
 ['Mexico', 'Canada']                                    li[-2]
 ['USA', 'Mexico']                                       li[1:3]


Solution for Exercise 2

li = ["USA","Mexico","Canada","Greenland"]
li[-1][0:5]


Solution for Exercise 3

ls = [7, 31, 365]
"A week has {0} days, the longest month has {1}, while the longest Julian year has
{2}".format(ls[0],ls[1],ls[2])
Chapter 3: Collections
Chapter objectives: You will be introduced to another family of datatypes –
collections.
        You will understand how collections differ from sequences and you will
       also know when to use collections and why they are useful.
        You will be introduced to sets and dictionaries which are the two
       datatypes belonging to the collection category.
        You will learn how to declare a set and perform operations over a set
       such as remove, modify and add items to a set You will practice the use
       of sets through a practical example that removes duplicates from an array
       of elements.
        You will understand how a dictionary is constructed; how it is useful for
       us, and how we work with dictionaries.
Sets
A set is an unordered collection of unique items. Unlike lists, tuples, and strings
sets cannot contain duplicate items. The other crucial difference between the set
datatype and sequence datatypes such as lists and tuples is that the items of a set
are unordered. You were able to access a list item using indexing, but you can't
do the same with sets. That's why sets are referred to as unordered collections.
To create a set, simply pick a variable name and use curly brackets to enclose the
items of the set: IDs = {"10A","10B","10C","10D"}

To prove what we just mentioned above about the unordered nature of the items
of a set, we could simply print out the set using the print function: print (IDs)
And that will output this: {'10B', '10A', '10D', '10C'}

As you see, the original order of the items has not been maintained. Python does
not want to use its resources for keeping the items of the set ordered because
keeping the order of the items is not the purpose of a set. The real purpose of a
set is to take care of having a collection of unique items. Let's illustrate this by
creating another set like the one above, but with one more intentionally duplicate
item: IDs = {"10A","10B","10C","10D","10A"}

Python will not throw any error during the declaration of a set with duplicate
items, but if you check your set, you will see that any duplicate item has
automatically dropped out of the set: print (IDs)
And this is what to expect: {'10A', '10B', '10D', '10C'}

And that is the set we declared, but without duplicates.
If you haven't yet wrapped your mind over the usefulness of sets in a practical
situation, that's perfectly normal. Let's make an illustration of the most common
situation when a set datatype comes in handy. The scenario involves the use of
probably the most used Python datatype – lists.
Let's suppose you have a big array of IDs records stored in a list: identities =
["10A","10B","10C","10D","10E","10A","10C"]
For some reason, you want to make sure that your list is free of duplicate items
and the Pythonic way to achieve that is to convert the list object into a set object,
and that is something that can be easily done via the set function: Tip: Don't
confuse a set datatype with a set function. The set function is designed to receive
an input which could be a list or a tuple, and generate an output which would be
a set datatype.

identities = set (identities)
What is happening here is that we are updating the value of the identities
variable by changing it from the existing list to a new set that is being generated
by the set function. If we now print out the updated variable: print (identities)
we get a set of unique items: {'10A', '10B', '10C', '10D', '10E'}

So, that is how you get rid of duplicates from a list. You may sometimes want to
get rid of the duplicate, but at the same time you may want to retain the datatype
of your original object. To retain the list datatype, you simply need to convert
the generated set back to a list using the list function: identities = list(identities) print
(identities)
And that would output a list: ['10A', '10B', '10C', '10D', '10E']

This example concludes this section and it should have given you quite a good
understanding over the use of sets.
Dictionaries
Dictionaries are another type of object that become very useful in many
programming situations. You already know that lists, tuples and sequences are
indexed by predefined numbered indexes. Dictionaries are indexed by values
that are explicitly given by us. Here is an example of a dictionary: table=
{"10A":"John Smith", "10B":"Jack Smith", "10C":"George Smith"}


10A, 10B and 10C are referred to as dictionary keys, while the names John
Smith, Jack Smith, and George Smith are referred to as dictionary values. So, a
dictionary is a set of pairs of keys and values. If we make an analogy with
sequences, the dictionary keys would be compare to sequence indexes, while the
dictionary values would be the sequence items.
Accessing a dictionary value follows the same syntax as accessing an item of a
list , tuple, or a string. The difference here is that we refer to the key instead of
referring to the index: table ["10B"]

And that would return the value associated to the key 10B: 'Jack Smith'

This information should be enough for you to understand how a dictionary is
structured and how you can extract information from it. We will cover more
about dictionaries in the next sections.
Working with Sets
Let's get back to sets now for a more detailed tour on how you can work with
them. We already covered a common scenario of using sets in the first section of
this chapter. However, there may be other less common situations where you
would need to work with sets. Let's suppose we have two sets now, id1, and id2:
id1={"10A","10B","10C"}
id2={"10C","10D","10E"}


If you wanted to find out which of the items occurs in both the sets, simply apply
the & operator to the sets: id1 & id2

And that would return the item of the intersection: {'10C'}

If you instead would need to know what letters are in id1 that are not in id2, you
could simply perform a subtraction between the sets: id1 – id2

And that would return this output: {'10B', '10A'}

You could even perform a set union: id1 | id2

And that would return a set containing the items that are in either id1 or id2:
{'10C', '10B', '10A', '10D', '10E'}


Sets support mutations, just like lists do. You can remove, modify or add new
items to a set. To add a new item to a set, use the add method: id1.add("10X")
To remove an item, use the remove method: id1.remove("10X")
These are the main methods that will help you start off using sets during your
programming activities. For a full list of methods that you can always apply the
dir method to the set object: dir (set)
Running this line in the Python IDE will print out a list of methods that you can
apply to a set object.
Working with Dictionaries
We already talked about how to create a dictionary, how a dictionary is
constructed, and how you can access dictionary values. In this section we will be
consuming more dictionary operations such as adding a new key-value pair to a
dictionary, removing an existing pair. Let's take this dictionary as a sample: table=
{"10A":"John Smith", "10B":"Jack Smith", "10C":"George Smith"}


If you were to add another pair here, you can simply do this: table["10D"]="Gunnar
Smith"


And that will add the 10D key and its associated Gunnar Smith value to the
dictionary table: {'10A': 'John Smith', '10B': 'Jack Smith', '10C': 'George Smith', '10D': 'Gunnar
Smith'}


If you changed your mind about Gunnar, simply go ahead and expel it from your
dictionary using the del keyword: del table["10D"]

And that will remove the entire pair: {'10A': 'John Smith', '10B': 'Jack Smith', '10C': 'George
Smith'}


Sometimes, you might need to extract only the keys or the only the values of a
dictionary. Python provides the keys, and the values methods to achieve just that.
To extract the keys: table.keys()
And that will produce an output similar to this: dict_keys(['10A', '10B', '10C'])
In case you need the values: table.values()
And that will output this: dict_values(['John Smith', 'Jack Smith', 'George Smith']) Python
dictionaries are very useful for lookup programs. A simple use of a Python
dictionary could be the case of creating a language vocabulary program where
the user would enter a word in the program and expect to get the meaning
associated to that word. You could get the vocabulary data from your data source
which could be a database for example, and then use a dictionary to store the
data. Then the program would wait for the user to input a word and get the
associated meaning in the dictionary for that key word. So, the words would be
stored as dictionary keys and the word meanings as dictionary values.
Likewise, there exist more and more examples, but you will understand them
better as you learn other concepts such as conditionals and looping throughout
the book.
Summary
In this chapter you were introduced to two other datatypes that are categorized as
collections in Python. These were sets and dictionaries. You learned that sets are
designed to hold a collection of unordered unique items and you were able to
understand when sets would be proper for you to use. Moreover, you learned the
main processes involved with sets which included various intersecting and union
operations.
In this chapter, you also learned how to create a dictionary. You also learned the
essence of the dictionary structure and how you can extract information from
such a data structure. You were introduced to main operations you can apply to a
dictionary, such as adding or removing dictionary values and even extracting all
the keys and all the values out of a dictionary. Moreover, we explained a use
case of dictionaries so that you could have a better idea of how datatypes
become useful when building real-life programs.
Assignment
Exercise 1
Consider this dictionary: company = departments = {"Human Resources":3, "Sales":5, "R&D":4}

Write a script that will output these two lists: ['Sales', 'R&D', 'Human Resources']
[5, 4, 3]


Hint: Consider using the dictionary keys and values method and the list
function.
Exercise 2

Look at the short scripts in the left column of the table, and write the expected
output on the right.
 Code                                                                    Output
 s = {3,4,5,6,7,5}
 l = list(s)
 l.count(5)
 d = {"Mon":20, "Tue":25, "Thu":30}
 l = list(d.values()) d[""Wed"] = 40
 sum = l[0]+l[1]+l[2]+l[3]
 a = [0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10]
 b = [0,5,10,15,20,25]
 a = set(a)
 b = set(b)
 list(a & b)
 d = {0:10,1:20,2:20,3:30}
 d[0]+d[3]


Solution for Exercise 1

departments = {"Human Resources":3, "Sales":5, "R&D":4}
keys = list(departments.keys()) values = list(departments.values()) print(keys) print(values)


Solution for Exercise 2

 Code                                                                    Output
 s = {3,4,5,6,7,5}                                                       1
l = list(s)
l.count(5)
d = {"Mon":20, "Tue":25, "Thu":30}                              An error will be produced
l = list(d.values()) d[""Wed"] = 40                             because list l contains only
sum = l[0]+l[1]+l[2]+l[3]                                       three items, not four.

a = (0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10) b = (0,5,10,15,20,25) a = set(a)   [0, 10, 5]
b = set(b)
list(a & b)
d = {0:10,1:20,2:20,3:30}                                       40
d[0]+d[3]
Chapter 4: Conditionals
Chapter objectives: You will learn how to write programs using the power of
conditional statements.
        You will learn how to make your program executes an action depending
       on whether a condition is true or not via an if statement.
        You will further advance your knowledge about conditionals by
       integrating an else statement in your script which will help your script
       execute an alternative actions.
        You will be introduced to a dynamic aspect of programming that has to
       do with the user interaction by learning how to receive and handle user
       input You will learn how to write conditional blocks with multiple
       conditions using elif statements.
        You will also learn a shortcut to if-else statements that is inline if.
If Statements
Now that you have learned the main datatypes and the available methods and
operations that can be applied to them, you are more than ready to start writing
some more complex code which will help you enter the world of programming
and give you the proper understanding of how powerful programming is and
what can you do with it. Conditionals are a crucial point of this transition from
the abstracts to the real world and you will be using them over and over again
during your programming activities.
Conditionals are blocks of statements that perform certain actions depending on
whether a specified condition evaluates to true or false. There are a few
constructs that are used to build up a conditional statement. One of them is the if
construct. Let's go ahead and look at an example to get a better idea: if 2>1: print
("Sure, 2 is greater than 1") What the above conditional block is doing is checking
whether number two is greater than one, and if that is true, it prints out a string.
Two is greater than one here, so the string Sure, 2 is greater than 1 will be
printed out: Sure, 2 is greater than 1

In case we had this conditional block: if 1>2: print ("Sure, 2 is greater than 1") Nothing
would happen after executing this block because one is not greater than two.
Let's look closer now at the syntax of an if statement block. As you see, the
block is quite readable and that's a distinct characteristic of Python. Python
minimizes the use of brackets, or semi-colons for the sake of readability. All you
need to write is the if construct and the conditional statement after that without
putting any brackets. The colon after the statement denotes that the conditional
line of the block has been written, and you are ready now to write the action to
be performed in the next line.
Notice here that we have indented the print statement with four white spaces.
Indentation is a Python syntax feature used to denote that the indented block
belongs to the unindented line above it. The print function here belong to the if
statement and it will be executed depending on that statement. Look at this other
example: if 2>1: print (2-1) print ("Yes, 2 is greater than 1") Here we checked whether two is
greater than one, and executed two lines of code. Both the lines were indented
meaning that they were both depended on the unindented line above them, so
they will be both printed out: 1
Yes, 2 is greater than 1


So, what happens if we don't indent a line under the if block? Let's try it out: if
1>2: print (2-1) print ("Yes, 2 is greater than 1") print ("This line will be always printed regardless of the
condition") Here we have a condition that is evaluated to false meaning that the
indented lines below the condition will not be executed. However, any line that
is unindented will not belong to the condition and thus it will be printed out
regardless of what happens inside the conditional block. Here is the output of the
block: This line will be always printed regardless of the condition Tip: When writing code in
the interactive IDE, the console will automatically indent the line for you when it
detects that you are writing a code block. If you are writing longer blocks such
as the one above, it is advisable to write it in the editor as a standalone script as
that will give you full control over the indentation.
An issue that should be mentioned is the amount of indentation that should be
applied before a line of code. In the examples above we used four white spaces,
but that number is not obligatory as far it is consistent through all the indented
lines. The strict rule is to to use at least one white space for indentation.
However, a good practice is to use four spaces as that makes the code more
readable and aesthetic.
If-else Statements
In the case of the if statement, the action under if was executed when the
condition was evaluated to true. If the condition was evaluated to false, nothing
would happen. An if-else statement is a sophistication of the if statement in that
it provides a ground for executing an alternative action in case the condition
evaluates to false. Here is an example: age = 13
if age >= 17: print ("Qualifies for a driver's license") else: print ("Under the legal age") What we are
doing here is we are first assigning the value of 20 to variable age, and then we
write a conditional block starting with the if construct and passing the condition
of whether the given variable is greater or equal to 18. If it is, the string in the
next line is printed out, otherwise the string under the else line will be printed.
Because number 13 is not greater or equal to 17, we will get this output: Under the
legal age
This should give you a good understanding of the if-else block and its difference
from the if block. The next section will introduce you to a dynamic aspect of
Python and programming and that has to do with the user interaction. More
specifically, we will be incorporating the if-else statement with the input that the
user types in to the program that we will make.
Receiving user input
The purpose of a program is often to get some input from the user and produce
an output. As programmers, we are responsible of handling this user input,
writing the algorithm that calculates what the program is intended to do, and
then return the output to the user. We will be doing such a program in this
section by incorporating the if-else block.
We will ask the user about their age, check whether their age qualifies for
applying for a driver's license and print out an answer for the user. To create
such a program, we need to write a script, and not just type in lines of code in the
interactive IDE.
The way we receive user input is actually quite simple. All you need to do is use
the input function. Here is how we use the input method combined with an if-
else block: age = input("Enter your age: ") if age >= 17: print ("Qualifies for a driver's license") else:
print ("Under the legal age") What the input method does is prompting the user to enter
a value, and then it stores that value into a variable so that we can use it for
whatever we want. And here we are using it in a comparison statement that
serves as the condition for the if-else block.
Warning: The input function reads the given input as a string datatype even
when the user enters a number. Therefore, in our example above, Python will try
to compare the given string with the number 18 and it will fail doing so because
a string cannot be compared to a number. However, there is a solution to that.
As the warning above suggests, trying to execute the code above will throw an
error similar to this: Traceback (most recent call last): TypeError: unorderable types: str() >= int()
What we need to do is simply convert the string into a float datatype which
Python treats it as a real number that can handle mathematical operations. So,
let's update our code to fix that error: age = float(input("Enter your age: ")) if age >= 17: print
("Qualifies for a driver's license") else: print ("Under the legal age") As you see, all we needed to
add was a float function which gets an input and converts it to a float datatype.
In this case the input for the float function is the string that the user will input
when the program is executed. Running this program will produce first output
this: Enter your age:
Once the user types in a number, another output will be generated. If for instance
we pass 20, we will get: Qualifies for a driver's license
That was a good introduction on how to get user input and use it in your script.
Elif Statements
You already know now that an if statement can handle one condition, while an
if-else statement can handle two. But how do we go about if we had to handle
more than two conditions?
Let's take as an example our driver's license program. We know that in some
states you are allowed to drive if you are at least 14, and in some others you
should be at least 17. This functionality can be easily applied through elif
statements: age = float(input("Enter your age: ")) if age < 14: print ("You're under 14 - too young for a
license") elif age >= 14 and age < 17: print("Subject of your state of residence") elif age >= 17 and age <
18: print ("Qualifies for a driver's license in US") else: print ("Qualifies for a driver's license in every
country") What this script is doing is prompting the user to enter their age. Then it
goes to every condition one by one starting with the if statement which prints out
a string if the entered number is less than 14. Then the first elif statement checks
whether the entered number falls between 14 and 17, excluding 17, and executes
the printing function below.
Tip: The and operator is used to evaluate if two expressions are true at the same
time. In our example, if age is greater or equal to 14, and at the same time less
than 17, the entire line evaluates to true.
The second checks whether the number falls between 17 and 18, excluding 18.
The last line is an else statement that will execute the line below it in case none
of the conditions above evaluates to true. In this example, the else statement will
be executed if the user inputs a number that is not less than 18, or in other words,
equal or greater than 18.
You are free to use as many elif statements as you need in your scripts, and you
are not obliged to use an else statement at the end of the conditional block. In
our example above we could have used another elif statement instead of else that
would check if the given number was greater or equal than 18, but using else
makes the code more elegant.
Inline if
Sometimes, you might want to quickly perform brief conditionals in Python that
assign a value to a variable depending on a condition. Python offers a very
condensed syntax for such operations, and that syntax is referred to as inline if.
Here is an example: age = 21
license = "Yes" if age > 18 else "No"
print (license)
And the output of this would be: Yes
You could read the second line of the code like this: The license variable will be
assigned Yes if age is greater than 18, otherwise, it will be assigned No. In our
case, license was assigned to Yes, because age was greater than 21. While inline
if is not an urgent syntax to learn, it can be useful later on when you write short
functions that require brief conditionals within.
Summary
In this chapter you were able to write much more advanced programs than
before by using the power of conditional statements. Specifically, you learned
how to use an if statement for evaluating a condition and executing an action
depending on whether the evaluation returned to true or false.
Furthermore, you learned how to perform an alternative action when the given
condition evaluated to false using the if-else construct.
Moreover, in this chapter you were introduced to a crucial aspect of
programming that is user interaction. You learned how to receive user input
using the input function, and how to use that input in your script.
You were also able to write conditional blocks that contained multiple
conditions using the elif construct. Lastly, you also learned how to write inline if
conditional expressions which are very practical when applying brief conditions
while writing short functions.
Assignment
Exercise 1
Consider this variable: a = "3"

Write a program that checks whether the variable is an integer datatype, and
convert it to an integer if it is not. Then print out the value of the variable.
Hint: In the conditional line of your code, consider comparing the type of
variable a against the string 'int'.


Exercise 2
Write a program that prompts the user to enter their email address. Then check
whether this is a gmail, hotmail, yahoo, or other user.
If the user is a gmail user, print out the message This is a gmail user. Follow the
same concept for the other email types of email accounts. If the user is neither
gmail, hotmail, nor yahoo, print out This is another user.
Hint: To check whether a string is part of another string, use this syntax: "apple" in
"apple juice"



Solution for Exercise 1

a = "3"
if type(a) != 'int': a = int(a) print(a)

Solution for Exercise 2

email = input("Enter your email address: ") if "gmail" in email: print("This is a gmail user") elif "hotmail"
in email: print("This is a hotmail user") elif "yahoo" in email: print("This is a yahoo user") else:
print("This is another user")
Chapter 5: Loops
Chapter objectives:
       You will be introduced to the concept of looping in Python and its
      importance in programming.
       You will learn how to repeatedly execute an action for a predefined
      number of times using the for-loop.
       You will again learn how to repeatedly execute an action as far as a given
      condition remains true and you will do that using the while-loop.
       You will learn a quick way of generating lists using a single line
      expression via list comprehensions.
What are loops?
A loop in programming is a block of code that is able to execute the same action
multiple times. The process of executing the same action many times is called
looping. Looping is encountered in almost every programming language because
that’s the way you to tell your program to do something over and over again
without you having to type that “something” in multiple lines . Looping in
Python can be implemented via two different looping techniques. These two
techniques are the for-loop and the while-loop.
The for-loop is designed to repeat the execution of a piece of code for a specified
number of times. On the other hand, the while-loop is again used to repeat the
execution of a piece of code until a specified condition is met. If these
theoretical descriptions of looping still don’t make much sense, then let’s carry
on to the next section where we will be going through each of the two loop
techniques and use them in some examples so that you get the your head around
them.
For-loop
Given the knowledge you have gained so far by reading this book, if I ask you to
write a script that would print each item of the list in a separate line, you would
probably write something similar to this: ls = ["Mon","Tue","Wed","Thu","Fri","Sat","Sun"]
print (ls[0]) print (ls[1]) print (ls[2]) print (ls[3]) print (ls[4]) print (ls[5]) print (ls[6])
This would be a correct solution because it would print out each item in a
separate line, but a very immature one because it lacks efficiency, and efficiency
is a crucial aspect of programming. The best solution to the problem would be
this: for item in ls: print (item)
This is what we refer to as a for-loop. A for loop always starts with the for
keyword followed by the loop variable which can have any name that you want;
then comes the keyword in and the object that is to be iterated. The next line
after the declaration of the loop is always indented. A good practice is to indent
four white spaces.
In fewer words, if we could translate the loop into human language, we could
say: for each item in the list, print out the item. And Python will do just that, it
will access each item of the list and it will perform the action written in the
second line. That’s how a for-loop works.

Tip: Most of the time you will be iterating through lists, just as we did in the
previous example. You can also iterate through other objects such as tuples,
strings, sets, and dictionaries, but you cannot iterate through basic datatypes such
as integers. Iterating through an integer would throw an error letting you know
that an integer is not iterable.
There can be times when you would want to iterate through a list of progressing
numbers, but you could find it cumbersome to type a long list of items. Anyway,
Python offers a technique to generate such a list through the range function. The
range function creates a list-like range object given a start, stop, and a step. For
example: for item in range(10,20,2): print (item)
This loop would produce this result: 10
12
14
16
18
And those are the numbers contained in the range that we created and printed out
from our for-loop. As you can see, the range generated an array of numbers
starting at 10, increasing by two, and stopping at 20, excluding 20.
If you want a default step of one, you don’t have to explicitly declare the step: for
item in range(10,15): print (item)
And here is the output: 10
11
12
13
14


Again, we got an array of numbers starting at 10, increasing by one, and
stopping at 15.
Notice that a range function generates a range object, which even though
behaves almost like a list, it is still not a list object. To convert a range object to
a list object, use the list function: lst = list (range (10,15) )
Printing the lst list will produce this output: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]

You can perform any action that you want inside the loop. You can even nest an
if statement: ls = ["1.txt","2.txt","3.csv","4.csv","5.csv"]
for item in ls: if "csv" in item: print(item)
What we are doing here is we are iterating through each string of the list ls, and
then checking whether the current string contains the part csv. If it does, the
entire string is printed out. As you see here we have two levels of indentation,
one under the for-loop, and another under the if statement. That means, the if
statement depends on the for loop, thus it has four spaces, while the print
function depends on both the if statement, but also on the for-loop, thus it has
eight spaces.
This should be enough to help you wrap your mind around a for-loop and
understand how it works. In the next section, you will be introduced to the other
loop that is used in Python – the while-loop.
While-loop
The while-loop is another looping technique which even though it is not used as
much as the for-loop, it is still a powerful looping technique that comes in handy
in certain situations.
A while-loop is used to execute an action until a given condition is met. To
illustrate this, let’s have a look at the following example: start = 0
while start < 4: print (start, " is less than 4") start = start + 1


We are starting here with the start variable which has an initial value of zero.
Our intention is to print out a string while the start variable value is still less than
four. Notice that the variable will always be less than four because the we have
included a counter in the last line which increments the value of our variable by
one each time an iteration occurs.
The output of the code would be this: (0, ' is less than 4') (1, ' is less than 4') (2, ' is less than 4')
(3, ' is less than 4')
So, in each iteration of the loop, Python is checking whether the variable start
continuous to be less than four, and prints out the value of start and the string is
less than 4 and just after that it adds one to the value start and it does everything
again until start reaches a value that is higher than four.
Let’s now look at a real world example that uses a while loop to check whether
the user is entering the correct password or not. As we are mentioning the word
“user”, that means we will be using the input function to receive the user
password and then use that password string in our while-loop. Here is the entire
script: passwd = input("Enter the password: ") while passwd != "book": print ("Wrong password: ")
passwd = input("Enter your password: ") print ("You have successfully logged in") Immediately here
we are asking the user to enter their password, and then we store the entered
password in the passwd variable. Then we check the value of the passwd
variable against the string book which is the real password. While the value of
passwd is not equal to the value book, we print out the string Wrong password
and prompt the user to enter their password again. The user enters the password
again, and the loop repeats the same actions. You should be able to understand
now that the while loop will run as long as the user keeps entering the wrong
password, and it will stop only when the user enters the string book. As soon as
this happens, the loop ends and the next line outside the loop is going to be
executed. In this case this line is the printing function that will print out the
string You have successfully logged in. That is quite a classic use case of the
while-loop that should have given you a very good understanding of the loop
structure and its usefulness.
List Comprehensions
List comprehensions are a short and efficient way of creating lists in Python.
They are often referred to as a quick substitution of for-loops as far as list
production is concerned. Let’s take an example where we suppose we have a list
of strings: strings = ["10", "20", "30"]

And we want to convert this list of string to a list of integers maintaining the
values of the list strings. For that, we would need to create an empty list: integers =
[]
And then we would iterate through each item of strings, convert it from str to int
and append the converted value to integers: for i in strings: integers.append(int(i)) These
two lines of code would populate our integers list with integer datatypes. So if
you print out integers, you will get this output: [10, 20, 30]

That’s one good way to convert the a list of strings to a list of integers. However,
if you’re looking for a more elegant way, you could choose to use a list
comprehension, just like below: integers = [float(i) for i in strings]

This would produce the same result: [10, 20, 30]

Similarly, you can use list comprehension when you want to generate a brand
new list quickly. For example: [a**2 for a in range(10)]

This code would produce this result: [0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81]

And that is a list which items are the squares of the items contained in the range
starting at one and ending at nine.
That is all about list comprehensions. With some practice you will be able to
embed the syntax of list comprehensions in your mind and make use of it every
time you need to quickly generate a list of items.
Summary
In this chapter you were able to understand what loops are and how they work.
You learned that a loop can be used to repeatedly execute an action multiple
times, and you learned how to do this using both a for-loop and a while-loop.
You learned that a for-loop is a loop that can execute an action or a series of
actions for a predefined number of times. You were able to understand that
iterating through lists is a very common task that can be implemented via the
for-loop.
You were also introduced to the while-loop and you were able to understand that
such a loop is very useful when you want to repeatedly execute an action while a
condition is true. You were able to practice this by creating a program that
checked whether the password entered by the user was the correct one or not.
Furthermore, you learned a shortcut to the for-loop that is used to quickly create
lists via a single line of code.
Assignment
Exercise 1

Consider the following list: ls = ["Mon","Tues","Wednes","Thurs","Fri","Satur","Sun"]

Write a script that uses the ls list to generate this output: Monday Tuesday Wednesday
Thursday Friday

Notice that the Saturday and Sunday have not been printed out.
Hint: Consider iterating to a split list, instead of the entire list, and remember
that we can concatenate strings using the add operator.
Exercise 2

Let’s suppose the 1st of January for year x is Monday. Count how many
Mondays are there in a year, given that year x has 365 days.
Hint: Consider using a range and a len function. Look up chapter 2 in case you
need to refresh your knowledge about the len function.
Exercise 3

Consider this list of names: names = ["johnsmith","jacksmith","georgesmith"]

Write a program that generates this list: ['johnsmith@gmail.com', 'jacksmith@gmail.com',
'georgesmith@gmail.com']


Solution for Exercise 1

ls = ["Mon","Tues","Wednes","Thurs","Fri","Satur","Sun"]
for item in ls[:5]: print (item+"day")

Solution for Exercise 2

x = range(1, 365+1, 7) x = list (x) len(x)

Solution for Exercise 3

names = ["johnsmith","jacksmith","georgesmith"]
emails = [name + "@gmail.com" for name in names]
Chapter 6: Custom Functions
Chapter objectives:
       You will know how to code more efficiently by learning how to define
      and execute custom functions.
       You learn how to define the input parameters of a function, how to write
      the function algorithm, and how to return the calculated output.
       You will make use of the output generated by custom functions and use it
      in your code for further operations.
       You will learn the different types of parameters and understand the
      usefulness of having default parameters in a function.
What are custom functions?
We have worked with quite a few functions so far throughout this book, such as
print, int, list, set, len, input to mention a few. These are all built-in functions
meaning that they have been built by Python authors and are readily available
for programmers to use. However, the authors cannot define any possible
function that one may need. Therefore, there exists a very powerful feature in
almost every programming language and that is custom functions. As you may
have already gotten the hint, a custom function is a function that is defined by the
programmer. In general, a function is a block of code that is designed to receive
an input, and calculate and return an output. Custom functions are usually
referred to as just functions from the programming community, and that’s how
we are going to call them in this book from now on.
Custom functions, or functions are extremely useful and their usefulness stands
behind the fact that you can define a function once, but you can call it later in
your program as many times as you want by just referring to the name that you
chose for your function when you defined it. In the next sections, you will learn
how to both define a function and how to call it for execution.
Defining and calling a function
Defining a function requires its own syntax. Let’s look at an example of how to
define a simple function that calculates the area of a square: def area (x): a = x**2
  return a
As you can see, the definition of a function starts with the keyword def followed
by a custom given name for the function, and the input parameter in brackets,
ended by a colon. Once you have written this very first line, then you are free to
write the algorithm that specifies what the function does. Note that the lines
under the def line need all to be indented.
In our case here we are simply calculating the area given the length of the square
side x, and we are storing the area value in variable a. The third line where we
specify what the function will return. In our case we want to return the area, so
we pass in the a variable to the return keyword.
That’s all about defining a function. What you also need to know is that there are
two ways where to define the function. One way would be to define it in the
interactive IDE, but if you want to store that function for later use, you need to
write it in a file through the editor. We recommend you use the second method.
Once you write and execute the function from your editor, the function
definition is stored in the memory of the interactive IDE, and now you can just
go ahead and call an instance of the function for execution. To do that, just type
in the interactive IDE this code: area (5)
And you will promptly see this output: 25

As you see, calling a function simply requires writing the function name, and
passing an input value. Similarly, you can pass any value that you want to the
function, and you can even use the returned value for further calculations. Let’s
say we want the area of four similar squares: area(5) * 4

And you would get: 100

You can even repeatedly execute the function in a loop: for side in [5,10,100]:
print(area(side)) What’s happening here is that the print function will print out the
output generated by the functions for the three input values of the list. Here is
what the loop would generate: 25
100
10000


As you see, there were three outputs printed out for each input item of the list.
Functions with multiple parameters
In the previous section we looked at an example of a function that was designed
to calculate the area of a square. But, how about calculating the area of a
rectangle instead? This would require entering two parameters, one for the
length of the long side, and one for the length of the short side. Good news
because it is quite easy to do just that: def rectangle (x,y): area = x * y return area
As you can see, to input more than one parameter, you just need to use a comma
as a separator. Then you can use those parameters in the function as you need.
Calling a function is just as easy: rectangle (10, 5)
That would output the expected area of the rectangle: 50

Tip: The variables that are passed in when defining a function are referred to as
parameters. However, the values passed when calling the function are referred
to as arguments.
Let’s go ahead now and look at a real life example. We are going to calculate the
fixed monthly payment P required to fully amortize a loan L over a term of
specified m number of months at a specified annual interest rate i. The formula
to calculate the fixed monthly payment is this: P = L[i(1 + i/12)m]/[(1 + i/12)m -
1]
Now, we need to define a function and implement this formula in Python code
inside the function. Here it is: def mortgage(L,r,m): P = (L * (i / 12 (1+ i / 12)*m)) ((1 + i
12)**m - 1) return P


As you see, this is a three-parameter function. The math syntax for the formula
of the function looks rather complicated, but you should be able to understand
every part of it if you carefully compare it with the source formula we wrote
before defining the function.
The benefit here is that once you store your function in a Python file, you don’t
have to type this formula any time you need to calculate the monthly payment
required for loan amortization.
Let’s now call an instance of our function, by supposing we have taken a loan of
100,000 dollars at an annual interest rate of 5%, and we want to amortize it over
a term of 120 months. Here is how we get the payment we would have to pay per
month: mortgage (100000, 0.05, 120)
And that would output this: 1060.6551523907553

That means you would need to pay around 1060 dollars per month for your loan.
Functions are not limited to mathematical formulas only. You can create any
function that you want. Let’s create a function that gets a name, surname, email
domain, and an extension and generates an email address. If you can recall from
the previous chapters, we were able to generate email addresses using string
formatting. We will do the same here, but everything will be written inside a
function. Here is the complete function: def email_generator (name, surname, email,
extension): address = "{0}{1}@{2}{3}".format (name, surname, email, extension) return address
As you see, we have assigned four parameters to our function, and therefore we
need to pass four arguments when we call it:
email_generator("John","Smith","gmail",".com") And that would output this string:
'JohnSmith@gmail.com'


Storing the function somewhere will allow you to reuse it as many time as you
will need it.
Functions with default parameters
It might happen that you will need to call certain functions over and over again
in your programs. For functions with many parameters, this would require you to
type in many arguments which is something that soon may become quite
tiresome. In such scenario, it may often happens that you may have to enter the
same arguments over and over again for the same function.
For example, you might want to generate email addresses for a wide range of
names and surnames, but you only want to generate email addresses that have
gmail.com as their base. Python has a technique that allows you to define a
function with default parameters, so that you don’t have to explicitly declare
them when you call an instance of the function. Here is the function we defined
in the previous chapter, but with default parameters: def email_generator (name, surname,
email="gmail", extension=".com"):
   address = "{0}{1}@{2}{3}".format(name,surname,email,extension) return address
See now how we go about calling this function: email_generator("John","Smith") And
the output should this again: 'JohnSmith@gmail.com'

As you see, we didn’t have to pass arguments for the email, and extension
parameters, because we were fine keeping the default ones. If we don’t want the
default arguments, we can just go ahead and explicitly declare new ones:
email_generator("John","Smith","yahoo",".it") And that would produce an email address
having yahoo as a base: 'JohnSmith@yahoo.it'

To conclude it, we could say that if you foresee that a certain argument is going
to be used extensively in your program, it can be a good idea to set it as a default
parameter when you define a function because that will save a lot of time later
on when calling instances of that function.
Tip: Non-default arguments are often referred to as required arguments because
calling a function without specifying them will not work.
Summary
In this chapter you were introduced to custom functions. You were able to
understand the difference between built-in and custom functions in Python. You
learned how to define a custom function and store it in a Python file for later use.
We were able to create several functions through this chapter and you learned
how to create functions with more than one parameter. Furthermore, we
practiced the use of functions by incorporating their output to perform further
actions such as looping through a list and executing the function repeatedly. We
practiced the use of functions by creating a function that calculated the monthly
payment required amortizing a loan, and we also created a function that could
generate email addresses out of a given set of strings. Lastly, you learned how to
create functions with default parameters and understand its improved efficiency
compared to having a long list of required parameters.
Assignment
Exercise 1

Create a function that calculates and returns the area of a triangle.

Hint: The formula that calculates the area of the triangle is:
Exercise 2

Create a script that accepts a string entered from the user, and passes the string to
a function. The function itself checks the number of characters that the string has
and returns the number back to the user.
Exercise 3

Consider this function we created in this chapter: def email_generator (name, surname,
email="gmail", extension=".com"): address = "{0}{1}@{2}{3}".format(name,surname,email,extension)
return address


Using this function, generate the following list of email addresses:
['JohnSmith@gmail.com', 'MarkPond@gmail.com', 'GeorgeLondon@gmail.com']


Hint: To iterate over two lists at the same time, make use of the zip function.
Here is an example: [i+j for i,j in zip ([1,2],[100,1000])]
Solution for Exercise 1

def triangle (h, b):
   a = (h*b)/2
   return a

Solution for Exercise 2

a = raw_input ("Enter some text: ") def count (a):
   return len(a)
print(count(a))


Solution for Exercise 3
[email_generator(nm,sr) for nm,sr in zip(["John","Mark","George"],["Smith","Pond","London"])]
Chapter 7: Classes
Chapter objectives:
       You will learn what classes are, and when you should use them in the
      programs that you will build.
       You will learn how to define a class.
       You will learn how to call an instance of a class.
       You will learn how to access methods and attributes from a class that you
      have defined.
       You will learn how to make use of the class inheritance technique that
      allows for better organization of class and code in general.
What are classes?
If you have reached this point of the book, that means you now know about
variables, functions, parameters, and attributes. These are all crucial elements
that build up the essence of a program. Now it is time to introduce you to the
concept of a class. A class is a technique that groups all the crucial elements we
mentioned above together to offer a more organized and object-oriented way to
create programs. The purpose of a class is to create some sort of object template
that will produce object instances having similar attributes and methods.
Therefore, we can think of classes as cookie cutters that we can mold at the
moment that we define a class. Once we define a class, we can produce as many
object instances as we want out of that class. As you already got the hint, a class
is basically constructed of methods and attributes. In the next section, we'll look
at what methods and attributes are, and of course you will learn how to define a
class.
Defining a class
When we wanted to create a custom function, we first had to define it using the
proper syntax, and then we could use it by calling an instance of the function.
Working with classes is basically the same. Here is a simplified architecture of a
Python class: class Something: def __init__(self, attribute1, attribute2, attribute3): self.attribute1 =
attribute1
   self.attribute2 = attribute2
   self.attribute2 = attribute3
   def method1(self): "Perform some action with attribute1"
   "Maybe perform some other action with attribute2 also"
   def method2(self): "Here come some action with self.attribute3 as well"


This is how a class would roughly look like. However, you might have a hard
time understanding it for now. Classes are truly useful when building relatively
large scripts that have a lot of code to absorb, and this code needs a way to stay
organized. The way to achieve that is by using classes to group similar things
together and that is often considered advanced programming. That said, it is still
a good idea to learn how to use classes now so that you are aware when to
choose a class for organizing your code.
We mentioned attributes and methods earlier. Methods are just functions that are
defined inside a class. Attributes are parameters that are passed to the class
methods. In the class we defined earlier, __init__, method1, and method2 are the
methods of the class. Self, attribute1, attribute2, and attribute3 are the attributes.
The method __init__ and the attribute self are special elements of a class, but we
will cover them later. Now, it is time to actually write a real class that you can
execute in your Python editor. Let's suppose we are running a service for
managing properties, and we want to create some sort of form that generates
property information. It would be a good idea to create a class that would
generate instances of property information in an organized way. Here is the
complete class for that: class Property: def __init__(self, address, prop_type): self.address =
address self.prop_type = prop_type print("Generates information about properties") def getaddress(self):
print("Address: %s" % self.address) def gettype(self): print("Property type: %s" % self.prop_type) Let's
start explaining what each of the lines does. The very first line is where we start
defining our class. The class keyword is what denotes that a class definition is
about to take place. The name Property is the class name chosen by us. Then, we
use indentation, just like we have done with functions, loops, and conditionals.
As you see, we are using the def keyword which defines a function. That's
technically a function, but when we write a function inside a class, we refer to it
as a class method. So, __init__ is the first method of our Property class, and it is
a special method. The __init__ method is automatically executed when you call
an instance of the class; the other methods are not. Let's quickly call an instance
of the class: Property("Lighted Street", "Hotel") Note: The class variables are written in
the __init__ method as you see it. Our class has three variables including self.
However, here we passed only four attributes. This is because you don't pass an
attribute for self beceuase self is an internal class variable. More details about
self will be given later.
And let's look at the output you should expect: Generates information about properties
<__main__.Property object at 0x00000000033848D0> As you see, when we are calling an
instance of the class, the printing function inside the __init__ method was
executed. The other methods such as getaddress and gettype methods were not
executed. The __init__ method is referred to as a constructor in other object-
oriented programming languages.
You're probably wondering what these three lines of the __init__ method are
about: self.address = address self.prop_type = prop_type
self is a variable that represents the instance of the object itself. On the left side
of the expression, the self.address is referring to the address member variable
which belongs to the class instance that the method is being called for. On the
other side, the address refers to the parameter that was passed into the method.
In fewer words, the member variables of the class are being assigned the values
of the parameters. You should always assign your class member variables to the
parameters in the__init__ method. Beside these assignments, you can also
include any other code which you would want to be executed every time you call
an instance of the class. In our case, we wanted to print out some general
information, so we incorporated the print function inside the __init__ method.
Variables address and prop_type passed to __init__ are referred to as class
attributes. If we want to execute any method of the class, we should again call
the class, and the method we want to execute using a dot notation as follows:
Property("Lighted Street", "Hostel").getaddress() This is a normal scenario of how you
would call an instance of a class. And the output of that would be: Generates
information about properties Address: Lighted Street
Notice that, the code inside __init__ was again executed, but besides that, the
code inside the getaddress method was executed as well. So, what we did here is
that we executed an instance of the class, and we got an object instance
generated given the attributes that we passed in when calling the class instance.
Similarly, you can call the other method as well in case you want to produce a
piece of information related to property type: Property("Lighted Street", "Hostel").gettype()
And as you might have guessed, the output would be this: Generates information about
properties Property type: Hostel
The code inside __init__ was executed again, and this time we had the method
gettype executed, but not getaddress.
If you want to access only the methods of your class with the aim to execute
only the code that is inside that particular method by excluding the code under
__init__ you can leverage a technique that uses a variable to store the class
instance to: prop = Property("Lighted Street", "Hostel") And from there you can access the
methods of your class by just pointing to the variable: prop.getaddress()
This would execute the code inside getaddress only: Address: Lighted Street
Methods are not the only thing you can access from a class; you can access
attributes too. Just like this: prop.address
And that will print out the value of the given attribute: 'Lighted Street'

This could be useful if you want to perform further operations with the attributes
of your class.
As you see, a class is like a structure that defines how an object should be laid
out. For example, a class pretends that a property has an address and a type, but
the class definition doesn't fill the methods or the attributes with content. That
part is implemented when we call an instance of the class with the desired class
methods as we just did.
To conclude it, you might be able to see now that classes give way to a high
level of organization and grouping of the functions and variables allowing you to
have better control over your code.
Inheritance
In the previous section we created a class for properties which generated
instances of property information. Sometimes, one class may not be enough
because you might ran across objects that do not share the same attributes. For
example, all properties are expected to have at least an address, and a certain
type. However, some properties such as hotels might also have a specified
number of stars. We could simply go ahead and add a star attribute to our class,
but then we might later need to use the class for generating instances of
apartments and apartments don't have stars. For this reason we might need two
different classes, one class that produces instances of apartment objects, and
another one producing instances of house objects. The good news is we don't
have to write each class from the beginning. Instead, we can just inherit the
features of the base class that we already have, and then add other features that
are specific to the derived class being created. This mechanism of creating a
class that inherits features from another class is called inheritance. The class that
the features are being inherited from is usually referred to as the base class,
while the new class that inherits the attributes and the methods is referred to as
the derived class. Let's now create a class that will generate a hotel object by
inheriting the attributes of the Property class we defined in the previous section:
class Hotel(Property): def __init__(self,address,stars): super().__init__(address, "Hotel") self.stars = stars
def getstars(self): print("Hotel stars: %s" % self.stars) Creating a derived class follows almost
the same structure with some minor differences. To tell Python that you are
defining a derived class, you need to pass the base class inside the brackets in the
first line.
Again, we need to define an __init__ method where we write everything that we
want to be executed when an instance is called. Here we are passing two
attributes for our derived class, address, and stars. We are not passing the
property type because the type will always be hotel and we can specify that
default value via the super function that you see below.
Further down, the super function will execute the __init__ method of the base
class. Here we need to specify the attributes of the base class again. These are
the address, and the type of the property. Because the type of our hotel class will
be always "Hotel", we can just enter the Hotel string here, so we don't have to
explicitly type it any time we produce a class instance. Next, we do the usually
assignment operation between the self.stars member variable and the stars
attribute.
Once, you write the __init__method, you can then write whatever method that is
specific only to the derived class that you are creating. In our case, we wrote the
getstars method which will generate some piece of information regarding the
number of stars that the hotel instance will have.
Now, we can just go ahead and assign an instance of the class to a variable: h =
Hotel ("Valley Street", 5) And from there, we can access features from both the base
class and the derived class as well. Let's try to get the info about the address:
h.getaddress()
And that would produce this: Address: Valley Street
As you see, even though we didn't explicitly define a getaddress method for our
Hotel class, we still were able to access it because of the inheritance that we
embedded in our derived Hotel class. Similarly, you can access methods that
were indeed defined in the Hotel class: h.getstars()
And that would execute the code that is inside getstars and produce the
following output: Hotel stars: 5

As you see, inheritance is an extra feature of classes that allows you to keep your
code organized. With practice, you will be able to master the syntax of defining
and inheriting classes, and you will also be able to spot the right occasion where
you should go ahead and use classes in your code.
Summary
In this chapter you learned what classes are and how to create them. You learned
that classes are a way that will help you code in a more organized and efficient
way. You were able to define a class with attributes and methods and then call
instances of the class or its features. Further, we extended the knowledge about
classes by practicing inheritance which is a concept that helps keeping classes
more organized. Throughout the chapter, you were introduced to an example
where a Property class was created, and you should now be able to create your
own classes, and call instances of them.
Assignment
Exercise 1
Create a Phone class designed to create mobile phone objects. Define two
attributes for the class, price, and brand. In addition to the __init__ method,
define two other methods, a getprice, and a getbrand method. The getprice and
the getbrand method will display information about the phone price and brand
respectively.
Hint: You should define the class from what you remember from the class
definition syntax, but you can have a quick look at the Property class if you get
stack.
Exercise 2
Create a Smartphone class designed to create smartphone objects. The class
should have three attributes, price, brand and screensize. It should also have an
__init__ method, a getprice, a getbrand, and a getscreensize method with each
method displaying relevant information about price, brand, and screensize
respectively.
Hint: You can make use of inheritance for defining your Smartphone class.


Solution for Exercise 1
class Phone: def __init__(self, price, brand): self.price = price self.brand = brand def getprice(self):
print("Price: %s" % self.price) def getbrand(self): print("Mobile brand: %s" % self.brand)

Solution for Exercise 2
class Smartphone(Phone): def __init__(self,price,screensize, ): super().__init__(price, "Beta")
self.screensize = screensize def getscreensize(self): print("Mobile screen size: %s" % self.screensize)
Chapter 8: Modules and Packages
Chapter objectives:
       You will learn how to work with modules and packages.
       You will learn that to keep the language light and flexible, there exist a
      wide range of external modules that can be easily installed to suit
      different programming needs.
       You will be able to tell the difference between modules and packages and
      know how to use them in Python.
       You will also learn how to get help information about Python classes,
      functions and keywords from within Python.
       You will learn how to create your own module and use it in Python.
What are modules?
Python is quite small as a software and that's an intentional design of Python to
keep the language simple and light. However, Python has a wide range of
external modules that you can import into your scripts and use their
functionalities. A module is simply a Python file with a .py extension containing
classes, functions and statements. When you start a Python session through
IDLE for example, external modules are not loaded by default. You need to
import them to make use of their features.
What are packages?
Packages are folders containing several modules or sub-packages inside. The
reason packages exist is to keep large amounts of code organized. Just like
modules, packages can also be imported into an interactive Python session or a
Python script. Some commonly used packages are installed by default when you
install Python, but some others need to be installed separately. The same goes
for modules. We will consume everything you need to know about packages and
modules in the next sections.
Working with modules and packages
As we already mentioned, modules are simply Python files that can be imported
into an interactive Python session or editor. In this section we will cover the
datetime module as an example of working with modules.
Note: All the techniques that we will use with the datetime module work the
same as with any other module or package.
datetime is a module that contains classes and functions for working with dates
and times. To access its functionalities you need to import it to Python like this:
import datetime
Once you have imported it, you can access the module features using a dot
notation. Let's try to call the now function inside the datetime class of the
datetime module: datetime.datetime.now()
And that would output this: datetime.datetime(2015, 6, 2, 14, 47, 29, 843894) And that’s an
array containing the current year, month, day, hour, minutes, seconds, and
milliseconds.
Working with the datetime module is quite cool, but let's don't forget we are
talking about modules in general here. We mentioned that a module is just a
Python file, so, let's try to find out where the datetime module is located in our
computer. To get the path, simply type in the module name in the interactive
session: datetime
And that will output something like this: <module 'datetime' from
'C:\\Python34\\lib\\datetime.py'> As you see, the output contains the path where the
module file is located. The path can be slightly different in your computer, but
you get the idea. If you browse through that path and open the datetime.py file
using the editor, the code you will see is the entire code that makes up the
datetime module. If dive deeply into the code, you will find a datetime class.
That's the class we called from our module using datetime.datetime.
Note: The fact that the class datetime has the same name with its module is just
a coincidence.
If you look even deeper inside the datetime class, you will find the now function
which we called in using datetime.datetime.now().
Tip: Normally, you will not need to open the source code of your modules or
packages, and you should be careful if you do because if you change or delete
something by mistake, it might make cause the module not to work. We are
accessing the module source code in this book so that you to understand how
things work.


Accessing packages and their functionalities follows exactly the same procedure.
You first import your package, and then use the dot notation to access its
features. Here is an example of accessing the tkinter package, a package that
implements graphical interfaces for your Python programs: import tkinter
And from there, you can access the package features via the dot notation:
tkinter.Tk()
And that would produce an empty graphical window.
Sometimes, you might need to repeatedly use a feature of a module or package.
In such cases, it would be more practical to import only that feature from your
module or package. To import a single feature, do this: from datetime import datetime
This would import only the datetime class from the datetime module. This keeps
your program lighter because not every feature of the module is loaded to the
script, but just the one you need. It also reduces the code amount, because
instead of doing this: datetime.datetime.now()
You can just do this now: datetime.now()
And that would give you the same output.

       Installing external modules and packages
The datetime module and the tkinter package we used as examples in the
previous section came shipped with the Python installation by default because
they are considered commonly used packages by the community. Other more
specialized modules or packages need to be installed manually into your system.
The good news is, there is a way to install modules and packages very easily.
You just need to open your computer command prompt or terminal and type in
this code: pip install modulename
For example, numpy is an external package offering 2D array objects in Pyhton.
To install numpy you should type this code: pip install numpy
That will download numpy from the online repositories and it will install it in
your computer. pip itself is a package that is installed by default with Python and
it is package that implements easy installation of external Python packages, just
as we're doing here.
Once the installation is completed, you can just go ahead and import the package
as we did in the previous section: import numpy
Last thing worth to mention is that if you want to remove an imported module or
package from a session, you can use the del keyword followed by the module or
package name. For example: del numpy
You can always import the module or the package back if you want.
And that's all you need to know about installing external modules and packages.
Code introspection
Code introspection is a set of techniques used to inspect packages, modules,
classes, functions and keywords. Code introspection in Python is implemented
through several functions that return various information about a feature. In this
section we will be trying out some of the introspection techniques. An
introspection "task" could be to find some general information for a feature. For
example, if you want to display some help info about the datetime module, you
could use the help function: import datetime help(datetime)
That would print out a description of the module, and it would list the module
features and their details. If you simply want a list of features contained inside
the module, you can use the dir function: dir(datetime)
You can perform the same operations over classes and functions as well. For
instance: help(datetime.datetime)
And even deeper than that: help(datetime.datetime.now)
Another useful code introspection feature is the type function: type(datetime)
A type function will output the type of the object that passed to the function. The
line above would output this: <class 'module'>
And that says that datetime is a module.
As you see, there are quite a few functions that allow you to introspect the code
you are about to use.
Creating your own module
You now know that a module is simply a Python file having classes, functions
and statements inside, and you also know that you can import a module or its
features into a Python script or an interactive session.
As you get better with Python and start developing relatively long scripts that
you want to reuse inside other scripts, it might be a good idea to import your
script or its features as a module in another script.
Let's take an example to illustrate the idea. Consider the class we created in the
previous chapter: class Property: def __init__(self, address, prop_type): self.address = address
self.prop_type = prop_type print("Generates information about properties") def getaddress(self):
print("Address: %s" % self.address) def gettype(self): print("Property type: %s" % self.prop_type) To
use it as a module, first of all, we need to store it inside a Python .py script, and
store it among the other modules in the Python installation directory which could
be something similar to C:\Python34\Lib.
Tip: To store some code in a .py script, you can either create an empty file in the
modules location, paste the code inside the file, and name the file under a .py
extension, or you can create a new file through the Python interactive IDLE and
save it in the modules location.
Once you have saved the script under a name such as property.py, you can open
a new interactive session, and import the new module as follows: import property
As you see, we used the name of the file to refer to the model. Once you have
imported it, you can use all its functionalities by referring to the model name.
Here is an example: property.Property("An address", "Apartment").getaddress() And that would
produce this output: Generates information about properties Address: An address
And of course, you can also import only the feature that you want from the
module. Let's import the Property class only: from property import Property
That would import only the Property class and its components from the module.
As you see, Python is highly flexible so that it can suit various custom needs.
Summary
In this chapter you learned about modules and packages. You were able to
understand the use of modules and packages in your programs. You were also
explained the difference between a module and a package. However, you saw
that using packages and modules in your scripts follows the same importing and
accessing rules.
Furthermore, you learned how to install external Python modules and packages
that didn’t come automatically installed with Python. You were also introduced
to code introspection by learning how to get relevant information about Python
classes, functions, and keywords.
Lastly, you were able to create your own Python module and use its features
inside Python.
Assignment
Exercise 1
       1. Which of the following statements about modules is not true?
           1. A module can be imported into a script or an interactive session
              just like a package does.
           2. A module is a .py file containing Python packages.
           3. A module is a .py file containing classes, functions and
              statements.
           4. A module provides a good technique for keeping scripts
              organized.
       2. Which of the following statements about packages is not true?
           1. Packages are imported just like modules.
           2. Packages can be collection of modules.
           3. Some packages do not come with the Python standard installation.
           4. Packages are a must for Python to work.
       3. What is not true about the following code?
    from base import element
              1. It imports only the element feature from the base and no other
                 element more.
              2. It waives the use of base.element in the code that will come after
                 that line.
              3. It works with modules, but not with packages.
              4. element belongs to base.


Exercise 2
Create a module that contains the following code and name the module
assignment.py.
intro = "Enjoy using our module!"
def area (x): a = x**2
   return a def email_generator (name, surname, email, extension): address = "{0}{1}@{2}{3}".format
(name, surname, email, extension) return address
Once you have created the module and placed it along the other Python modules,
perform the actions on the left column of the table and write the code that you
used to perform those actions in the right column.
 Action                                                            Code

 Import the module into the interactive
 session.
 Display "Enjoy using our module!"
 Output the area of a square with a side length
 of 6 units using the area function.
 Remove the assignment module from the
 session.
 Import only the email_generator function to
 the session.
 Import the area function following the same
 technique.


Solution for Exercise 1
Correct answers: 1: b 2: d 3: c
Solution for Exercise 2
 Action                                                            Code

 Import the module into the interactive           import assignemnt
 session.
 Display "Enjoy using our module!"                print(assignment.intro)

 Output the area of a square with a side length   assignment.area(6)
 of 6 units using the area function.
 Remove the assignment module from the            del assignment
 session.
 Import only the email_generator function to      from assignment import
                                                  email_generator
 the session.
 Import the area function following the same      from assignment import
                                                  email_generator
 technique.
Chapter 9: File Handling
Chapter objectives: You will learn how to open an existing text file in Python
and read its content.
        You will also learn how to write new content to an existing file.
        You will be able to create new text files and type text in them from
       within Python.
        You will also be able to open existing binary files and create new ones
       essentially using the same techniques as with text files.
        You will learn a very robust way of handling files in Python using the
       with keyword.
        You will also be introduced to the os module which is a built-in module
       used to interact with directories and perform actions such as creating new
       directories, changing the current working directory, listing directory
       content, and deleting folders and files as well.
Opening a file with Python
Opening files using computer programs is a regular routine of every computer
user. For example, to read a text file, you need to open it with a certain reader
such as a notepad program. Likewise, you can open files in Python too.
However, the technique to open files in Python does not involve a simple double
clicking of the file – you need to write a few lines of code to open a file in
Python.
Files can be either text or binary. We will be handling both these types files in
this chapter. There are also two different opening modes available in Python, a
read mode and a write mode. When you open a file in read mode, you cannot
write anything to that file. All you can do with the file is read its content. This
works well when you just want to get information from the file. If instead you
are planning to modify your files with Python, you have to specify a write mode
when opening them. In the following sub-sections, you will see how to open text
and binary files. Opening a file in read mode is often simply referred to as
reading a file, and opening it in write mode, is referred to as writing a file. We
will use these two abbreviations in this chapter.
Before looking at examples on how to open the different file types with different
modes, let's first have a look at the syntax on how to open a file in general. Here
it is the general syntax: file = open (filepath, mode)
This is it. In the first line, we are creating a variable called file. That's where we
store our opened file object. And inside the open method we specify the file path
string, and the opening mode string. Next, if you need to access the content of
the file, you would use a read method like this: content = file.read()
This would store the text content of the file object in the content variable. Once
you have grabbed the content, you can do whatever you like with it. For
example, you can simply print the content out: print(content)
And once you have finished working on your file, you need to close the file, just
as you do with any other program, so that you don't cause any file conflict. To
close a file with Python, you would use the close method.
file.close()
That would denote the end of reading a file and it would free the file from any
connection with the Python program. In the next sub-sections we will explains
the different scenarios.
       Reading a text file
Let's suppose we have a text file named sample.txt in our C:/examples directory
in our computer and the text file has a line of text inside saying This is a sample.
Here is a code that would open the text file in read mode: file =
open("C:/examples/sample.txt", 'r') As you see, we passed in the file path, and the read
mode denoted by an r. At this point, a file object has been opened in Python.
Let's now read its content and store it in a variable: content = file.read() And let's
print the content out: print(content)
And you would expect this output: This is a sample.

When finished with the file, you need to close the file as follows: file.close()
That's how you read the content of a text file. However, if there were more than
one line in the file you might have to take another workaround. Let's suppose the
file had two lines: This is a sample.
This is some content.


You could use this code to read such a file with the read method: file =
open("C:/examples/sample.txt", 'r') content = file.read() print(content)
You would get this output: 'This is a sample.\nThis is some content.'

Note: The \n is a special Python character denoting a break line.
The problem here is that as you see, all the lines were read as a single string. A
better solution would be to store each line as a list item so you can manage the
lines better. This is very easy to do. Simply apply this code: Tip: Don't forget to
close the file before reading it again because that may cause problems.
file = open("C:/examples/sample.txt", 'r') content = file.readlines() print(content)
This would print out a list: ['This is a sample.\n', 'This is some content.']

As you see in the code, instead of read, we used readlines which produces a list
of text lines. Now we can treat and print those lines one by one using a simple
loop: for line in content: print(line)
That would output this: This is a sample.
This is some content.
This is all you need to know to get started with reading text files. Next, we will
see how we can write content inside text files.

       Writing inside a text file
In this section we will focus on how to write some content in a text file. The
syntax is generally the same as in the case of reading content, but here we need
to specify a write mode in the open function and also apply a write method to the
file object. Here is an example that will add a third line to our sample.txt file: file
= open("C:/examples/sample.txt", 'a') file.write("This is some more content\n") file.close()

Note: Remember that once you have written something in the file, you need to
close the file to see the content inside it.
As you see in the last block of code, we passed in the file path and an append
writing mode denoted as a. Next, we used the write method to append a line to
the text file. The \n special character creates a break line just after the line we are
writing. The reason we create a break line is that if we write a second line later,
the line will be written below the previous line, and not next to it.
If you check the text file now, you will notice three lines in it: This is a sample.
This is some content.
This is some more content.


There is one more writing mode that is worth mentioning and that’s the w mode.
The w mode is used when you want to overwrite the existing content of the text
file. Here is an example: file = open("C:/examples/sample.txt", 'w') file.write("This overwrites
everything\n") file.close()
If you execute this code, you will see that whatever text you had in your file, the
text is now gone. All you will see is the line you just wrote: This overwrites everything
This is how you can write content in text files. Combining these functions with
looping techniques makes the file handling a powerful tool.

       Creating a new text file
Creating a new text file involves the same syntax as in opening an existing file in
write mode. Let's try to create a file called new.txt and write a line of text inside
it: file = open("C:/examples/new.txt", 'w') file.write("New text here.\n") file.close()
As you see, the code is exactly the same as in the case where the new.txt file
would be an existing file. So, Python checks whether there already exists a file in
the computer or not. If it exists, it opens that file. If it doesn’t, it creates such a
new file.

       Reading, writing and creating new binary files
A binary file is any file that is not a text file. Reading a binary file follows the
same syntax as in reading text file with the difference in the opening mode. Here
is an example on how to read a binary file: file = open("C:/examples/sample.jpg", 'rb')
content = file.read()
This will store the binary content of the sample.jpg file in the content variable.
You can then use that content to perform further actions. For example, you can
write the content in a new file in a new location: outfile = open("C:/output/out.jpg", 'wb')
outfile.write(content) file2.close()
If you open the out.jpg file with a photo viewer you will see that the files have
the same content as the sample.jpg file. As you see, creating such a copy is a use
case of writing binary files in Python. As you build Python programs, you will
run into more complex scenarios where you may interact with different types of
files and use Python as an intermediator to handle files.
Handling files easier with "with"
In the previous section, we covered all the techniques that you need to know for
handling text and binary files. These techniques are a must for beginners to
understand how file handling works in Python. However, they are not a must to
use in practice because Python offers a more robust way of handling files
through the with technique. For example, you learned that in order to create a
new file, you had to write these lines of code: file = open("C:/examples/new.txt", 'w')
file.write("New text here.\n") file.close()
You can do exactly the same thing by wrapping the functions inside a with
method block. Here is the code: with open("C:/examples/new.txt", 'w') as file: file.write("New
text here.\n") This will create a new file for you and write some text in it.

The way we would read these two lines of code in human language would be
this: with the opened new.txt file as file, perform the following action which is
writing the New text here line.
If you didn't noticed it, here we didn't use the close method because the with
block will close the file for automatically once the operations have been
finished. Notice that we are using indentation here just as we have done with
other kinds of blocks such as for, while, and if blocks.
The with method is often preferred over the classic method because it is
considered shorter and more solid and we suggest you use it whenever you want
to read and write existing text or binary files, or create new ones.
Working with directories
It can happen that you might have to deal with directories while coding in
Python and there are quite a lot of Python features out there to help you handle
directories. In this section we will cover the most important ones.

      Changing the current working directory and creating new ones
You may have noticed that when we accessed or created a new file, we passed a
full file path as the file object: with open("C:/examples/new.txt", 'w') as file: file.write("New text
here.\n") Sometimes, you might need to just pass the file name only. However, if
you just pass the file name to your open function as follows: with open("new.txt", 'w')
as file: file.write("New text here.\n") That would create a file new.txt in the current
working directory which is often the folder where the Python installation is
located. You probably don't want the file to be created in that directory, and for
this reason there exists a way to change the current working directory.
The method that changes the current directory and other similar methods that
interact with your operating system are accessed through the os module. Here is
how we would handle our case of creating a new text file: import os
os.chdir("C:/examples") with open("new.txt", 'w') as file: file.write("New text here.\n") This would
create the new.txt file in the examples folder. As you see, once we imported the
module, we called the chdir method which changes the current working
directory to C:/examples. Once we have done that, we can just pass a file name
to the open function.
Be aware that the examples folder must exist in your system. Otherwise, an error
will be thrown. So, you should either create a folder manually or have Python do
that for you. If you're headed for the second option, then what you need is the
makedirs method of the os module. Here is the updated code that includes the
makedirs method: import os os.makedirs("C:/examples") os.chdir("C:/examples") with
open("new.txt", 'w') as file: file.write("New text here.\n") As you see, you need to create the
directory first if it doesn't exist, and then change the current directory to that.
If not sure which the current directory is, you can always make use of the getcwd
method as follows: os.getcwd()
That would return something like this depending on what your current directory
is: 'C:/examples'
Notice that the object that you pass or that you get from the os methods are often
strings. You can check that out yourself if you like using the type method:
type(os.getcwd())
And that would return this: <class 'str'>
This tells you that the getcwd method generates a string. Therefore, you are able
to manipulate these strings using string formatting techniques which we covered
in the string formatting section of the second chapter.
However, there are also methods such as listdir which would output othera list
datatype. Specifically, the listdir method would generate a list of file and folder
names contained in the current working directory. Here is how you would use it:
os.listdir()
Simply enough, this would output something like this: ['new.txt', sample.txt', 'subfolder']

As you see, we didn't pass anything to listdir. You can also list the content of
every other directory path in your computer without having to change the current
working directory, but you would have to pass the directory path in that case:
os.listdir("C:/other")
This would output a list of file and folder names contained inside the other
folder.

        Deleting files and directories
In case you need to delete an empty directory, you can use the rmdir method as
follows: os.rmdir("C:/examples")
Note: If the directory you are trying to delete contains any files inside, the
deletion will fail.
To delete a directory that contains files inside, you need to use a method called
rmtree which is a property of the shutil module. Python 3.4 has shutil already
installed, so you don't need to do any extra installation work. Here is how you
would use rmtree after you have imported shutil: shutil.rmtree("C:/examples") That
would delete the folder and all its content.
Note: If a file contained in the folder you are trying to delete is already opened
in Python or other program, the deletion of the directory will fail.
Finally, to delete a single file, you can use the remove method of the os module
as follows: os.remove("C:/examples/sample.txt") Again, if the file is already opened in
another program, Python will throw an error.
That was some compact information about how to work with directory from
within Python. Now that you know how to do code introspection, you can go
ahead explore other features that are available in the os or the shutil modules.
Summary
In this chapter you learned how to handle files with Python. We looked at how to
handle both text and binary files. Specifically, you learned how to read a text file
in Python and use the file content for preforming other operations within Python.
We also looked at how to open a text file in writing mode and write some text
inside it. You were able to understand the difference between writing and
appending some text in a text file. Moreover, you also learned how to create a
new text file in a certain directory, and we also wrote some content inside the
newly created file as well.
Further, we looked at how to handle binary files. You learned that handling
binary files follows the same concept as with text files.
On top of the classic methods to handle files, you also learned a compact method
of handling files using the with keyword. You were able to understand the
efficiency in using with by practicing a few file handling examples.
You also learned how to interact with directories in Python using the os module.
You now know how to change the current working directory, create a new
directory, and list directory content. Lastly, you also learned how to delete
existing directories from within Python.
Assignment
Exercise 1
Write a Python script that will create a new text file in your computer. Then,
using looping, write the following lines of text inside the text file: 1145
1139
1132
No data 1141


Hint: You could build a list with the required values and iterate through it inside
the with block. Don't forget that you should pass strings datatypes to the write
method.
Exercise 2
In this exercise, you have to do the reverse of exercise 1 that is reading the
existing text file you created in exercise 1, and store the lines of text in a list.
So, you will start from the text file that contains these lines: 1145
1139
1132
No data 1141


At, the end you should create a list that looks like this: ['1145', '1139', '1132', 'No data',
'1141']


Hint: If you choose to use readlines, you should care to end up with items
without the \n part. One way to do this is that instead of passing item to the
append method, you can pass item.strip("\n"). The strip method removes a part
from a string.
Solution for Exercise 1
with open("C:/examples/data.txt", 'w') as file: for item in ["1145","1139","1132","No data","1141"]:
file.write(item+"\n")

Solution for Exercise 2
data = []
with open("C:/examples/data.txt", 'r') as file: for item in file.readlines(): print(item)
data.append(item.strip("\n"))
Chapter 10: Other Advanced Functionalities
Chapter objectives:
       You will be introduced to more specific functionalities that are available
      in Python.
       You will learn how to make your code more readable by commenting it.
       You will know more about errors and will also learn how to handle
      exceptions.
       You will learn how to create and connect to databases; create tables,
      insert, update and delete rows, and query database data from tables.
       You will how to find patterns in text using regular expression operations.
       You will also be strengthening your general Python skills by
      implementing examples while learning these advanced concepts.
About this chapter
If have reached this point of the book, that means you now know how to handle
Python and make quite a few programs using the core operations of the language
such as making math calculations, manipulating strings and lists, creating and
using custom functions, working with classes and modules, and building
conditionals and loops. In this chapter you will learn a few more functionalities
that maybe are not that vital to build basic non-specialized programs, but very
important as they will strengthen your foundations in Python.
Some of the functionalities that you will learn in this chapter will help you write
more efficient code, allow you to better handle your errors, and also make you
aware of what can you do more with Python.
Commenting you code
Often scripts look intimidating, especially the ones that don't contain any
comments. Commenting your code means writing general human language
inside your scripts with the aim to provide information and explanations to the
programming code. However, you can't just go ahead and write lines without
following some predefined syntax rules. The good news is that inserting
comments in your code in Python is very easy. There are actually two ways of
doing that. You can either add single or multiple line comments. We will explain
them both in the following example. Spend a few moments and try to understand
this piece of code: id = input("Enter your ID card number: ") def texting(id): with
open("C:/examples/ids.txt", 'a') as file: file.write(id+"\n") texting(id)
Even though this code is not complicated, even an experienced program may
spend some time trying to understand what it does. Now, we will add comments
to the code and ask you to go through the code again and try to understand it
better: """This program prompts the user to enter their ID number. Once the user enter their ID number,
the number is stored under a new line in a text file.
Each entered ID will be stored in a new line."""

#prompting the user to enter their ID
id = input("Enter your ID number: ") #Building a function that opens a text file and stores the IDs in there
def texting(id): with open("C:/examples/ids.txt", 'a') as file: file.write(id+"\n") #Calling the function and
passing the user input to it texting(id)
As you see, we added some explanations to the code. The first part that is
enclosed in triple quotes is a multiline comment. A multiline comment is used
when you need to write a relatively long comment that is expected to consume
more than one line. Usually, multiline comments are written at the beginning of
the script to explain what the script does.
Next, we have a single line comment. Single line comments start with a hashtag
(#) symbol and they are used to explain small parts of your code. If you want to
add another line of comment, you should write it in another line and have it start
with a hashtag.
The idea here is that Python will ignore the text that you write after the hashtag
symbol. The same works for the code written inside the triple quotes. It is highly
recommended that you use commenting regularly in your code because that will
help understand the code better for both you and other who may be involved in
your scripting as well.
Errors and Exceptions
As any other programmer, you will come across numerous errors as you write
and test your code. These errors can be of different types. The most common
ones are syntax errors. A syntax error happens when you haven't followed the
syntax rules of the language. When you hit run, before executing the code,
Python checks for syntax errors first. For example, if you write this code: x = 3:
Python will detect there's an unexpected column at the end of the line and it will
prompt you about a syntax error.
However, even when the syntax of your code is correct, you may still get an
error. Errors during execution are called exceptions. Let's have a look at an
example. The code is syntactically correct, but there's an exception in it: a = 2
b=0
c = a/b
This code will try to divide two by zero which mathematically doesn't make
sense. Therefore, so you will get an exception as follows when executing this
code: Traceback (most recent call last): File "C:\examples\Exceptions.py", line 3, in <module> c = a/b
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero This tells us that an exception was found in line 3.
Every kind of exception has a name, and the name for this one is
ZeroDivisionError. There's also a short explanation of the exception stated here
as division by zero. So, Python is trying to tell us that the source of the problem
and it does quite a good job in doing so. However, the error message we got
maybe not very friendly for the user we are targeting for the program we build.
This is why the idea of exception handling exists.

          Handling exceptions
Using exception handling techniques, we can anticipate an exception and alter its
display message. The specific technique to achieve this is the try and else clause.
Let's incorporate the clause to our code: a = 2
b=0
try: c = a/b except ZeroDivisionError: print("Numbers cannot be divided by zero. Please change the value
of b.
")
As you see, we enclosed the expression where we anticipate a possible error
inside a try block. First, Python will execute the first two lines of variable
declaration, and then executes the try block. If b was not zero, the c variable will
be assigned the calculated value and no error will be thrown. If there is a
ZeroDivisionError exception, then the code under except will be executed. So, in
this case, we would get this output: Numbers cannot be divided by zero. Please change the
value of b.


You can also leave except without explicitly declaring what error to expect. This
would be as follows: a = 2
b=0
try: c = a/b except: print("Numbers cannot be divided by zero. Please change the value of b.
")
This would not handle only division errors, but every kind of error. Leaving
except without an explicit error is not recommendable because it generalizes the
errors that may be thrown and hides the type of error you are getting, making it
difficult to fix your code. If you expect to have more than one error in an
expression, you can apply more than one except clause as follows: a = 2
b=0
try: c = a/d except ZeroDivisionError: print("Numbers cannot be divided by zero. Please change the value
of b") except NameError: print("The formula seem to be wrong") Running this code would
output this: The formula seem to be wrong
That is because we are getting a NameError in the formula because we are trying
to divide the a variable with the d variable which has not been defined
anywhere, thus the NameError.
The list of exceptions is quite long, but only a few of them will be occuring often
while you make programs. For a full list of exceptions you can refer to the
Python official online documentation.
Database handling
Interacting with a database is one of the most outstanding aspects of Python.
You already know that a database is an organized collection of data. The most
common scenario on how Python interacts with a database is in a web server –
web client scenario. In such a scenario, the database resides in the server, and
Python makes requests to the database such as sending SQL queries, receiving
the input, and generating some output for the web client.
To be able to use Python for interacting with a database, you need a special
database library. We will use the sqlite3 library here. sqlite3 has been
automatically installed when you installed Python, so you don’t need to install it
again.
In this section we will be connecting to a database, create a database table,
inserting, updating and deleting table rows, and retrieving table rows. So, let's
start by establishing a connection to a database: import sqlite3
db = sqlite3.connect('C:/examples/mydb.db') All we did here is we imported the sqlite3
library, and connected to the mydb.db database. If the mydb.db database does not
exist in your system, the code will create a new one under named mydb.db, and it
will establish a connection to that database.
Next, we will create a table structure in our existing database. The following
code does just that: db.execute('create table song ( title text, author text, rating int)')
db.commit()
As you see, we are applying the execute method to the database object. The
execute method gets SQL code as output. SQL is the language used to manage
data held in databases. Even though you generally need to know some SQL to be
able to interact with databases via Python, you will still be able to understand it
as it is not a difficult language.
So, the expression 'create table song ( title text, author text, rating int)' is the
SQL code we are sending to the database. What it does is create a table named
song, and this table will have three fields, title, author, and rating. Each of the
fields will later hold data of a predefined type. In this case the title, and the
author fields will be text, while the rating filed will be an integer. The commit
method then saves the changes made to the database.
Notice that if you try to create a table that already exists, you will get an error.
To avoid that, you can add another line before creating the table as follows:
db.execute('drop table if exists song')


This line will delete the table if it already exists.
So, at this point, all we have is a database and a table with three empty fields. To
insert some rows to your table, you need to call the execute method again and
pass the appropriate SQL code that inserts rows to a database table. This would
be as follows: db.execute('insert into song (title, author, rating) values ("The map of reality", "The New
Smiths",9)')
db.commit()
As you see, the SQL keyword to insert a new row is insert followed by into and
the table name. Then you need to specify the fields you want to insert row values
to, and then the actual values corresponding to those field names.
If you change your mind about the values you inserted, you can always updtate
them using the SQL update keyword as follows: db.execute('update song set rating = 10
where title = "The map of reality"') db.commit()

This will update the song table and set the rating to 10 for the row where the title
value is The map of reality. You can update any other record using the same
syntax.
At this point, we have a database with a table containing three fields and one row
with values for each field. You probably want to see the values you have in your
table now. Well, one way to do that is to open the mydb.db file via a database
program if you have one. The other way is to use Python code to retrieve the
data and display them in Python. We will do just that now. Remember that you
need to have an established connection to the database before executing this
code: data = db.execute('select * from song') This will create a cursor object and store it in
the data variable. A cursor object contains tuples of data it receives from the
database table. In this case we selected all the rows from the song table. We can
now iterate through the cursor and print out the rows that it has fetched like so:
for row in data: print(row)
This loop would output this: ('The map of reality', 'The New Smiths', 10) And that's a tuple
object that we grabbed out of the cursor object. The benefit of retrieving data
from the database is that you can perform various actions to the database data
with Python and use them in your programs.
Lastly, we will see how we can delete rows from a table using Python. As you
might expect, this also employs very few code: db.execute('delete from song where rating =
10') db.comit()
That would delete the entire row where the rating value is equal to 10.
Great! This should give you a good understanding of how Python can be used to
interact with a database. You now know how to perform the most common
database operations from within Python.
Regular expressions
Regular expressions are operations used to match text patterns. Regular
expressions are commonly used when building text processor programs. For
example, if you search for a word in a text document, some sort of regular
expressions will be running in the background to search and match your text
pattern. Therefore, if you are planning to process text using Python, chances are
that you will have to learn regular expressions for matching text patterns. The
regular expression operations are brought about by the re Python module. The
module has been automatically installed when you installed Python, so you can
just import it to your script or interactive session.
Let's now go ahead and look at an example. We are going to store some text
inside a string, and then see if we can find a specific pattern inside the text. Here
is the code: import re
text = "Here is some text that contains something."
pattern= "that"
re.search(pattern, text)


What we did here is we imported the re module first, and then we created some
text, which is a string datatype and stored it in the text variable. We also stored
our string pattern in variable pattern.
The last line is what contains the regular expression operation. In this case we
are looking at the search method which will scan through the text looking for a
match to the given pattern and it will return a match object if the match was
found, or None if there is no match. Because the pattern that is contained in the
text, we will be returned a match object as follows: <_sre.SRE_Match object; span=(18,
22), match='that'> In the returned match object you can see the span of the pattern
which is from index 18 to index 22. The object also contains the pattern that was
being searched. If you need, you can extract the span of the pattern, by applying
the span method to the match object as follows: re.search(pattern,text).span()

This will return the tuple containing the span indexes: (18, 22)
You can also extract the start index only: re.search(pattern,text).span()
And that will return this: 18
Similarly, you can also get the end index: re.search(pattern,text).end()
And you will get this: 22

The search method seems to be working smoothly, but you were probably
expecting some more friendly output. When you search for a pattern in a text
processing program, you don't get an ugly match object as a return. So, let's try
to improve the output for the user by returning two different messages depending
on whether the match is found or not. Here is where the other fundamental
programming concepts come in handy. To implement this, we need to employ an
if conditional statement in the code as follows: import re text = "Here is some text that
contains something."
pattern = "that"
if re.search(pattern, text): print("Yes, %s was found in the text" % pattern) else: print("No, %s was not
found in the text" % pattern) As you see we are passing the search method to the if
statement. If the pattern is found in the text, a match object is generated and the
conditional occurs. Therefore, the first print function will be executed. If the
pattern is not found in the text, a None object is generated and the condition is
not satisfied, thus the code under else is executed. In this case, the pattern occurs
in the text, so we will get this output: Yes, that was found in the text
If you like to improve the output even more, you could add an input function
asking the user to enter the pattern, and you can also print out the span of the
pattern in the text.

       Matching more than one pattern
In our previous example, we had only one pattern occurring in the text. If we had
two same patterns, the search method would fail to find them both: text = "Here is
some text that contains something that occurs twice."
pattern= "that"
re.search(pattern, text)
This would return this: <_sre.SRE_Match object; span=(18, 22), match='that'> As you see,
that would capture only the pattern that occurs first. To capture all patterns, we
need to use the findall method as follows: text = "Here is some text that contains something
that occurs twice."
pattern= "that"
re.findall(pattern, text)
That would return a list of both the patterns: ['that', 'that']
A use of findall would be to get the count of the occurring patterns as follows:
len(re.findall(pattern,text))
And that would return this: 2

So, you know how many patterns where found.
If you still want to get match object as return, instead of a list, you would have to
use the finditer method.finditer will return an iterator object which contains the
set of match objects found during the search. Here is how we would implement
it: import re text = "Here is some text that contains something that occurs twice."
pattern= "that"
matches = re.finditer(pattern, text) for i in matches: print(i.span())
As you see, we stored the iterator object to the match variable, and then we
iterated through the iterator and accessed the spans of the found matches and
printed them out.
These were some of the main methods that we could mention in this book as far
as regular expressions are concerned. More regular expressions exist out there
that suits more complex matching patterns, but you will learn them as you
advance with Python and the need calls you to work on building text processing
scripts.
Summary
In this chapter, you learned some more specific concepts that not only
introduced you to new techniques, but also enforced your existing fundamental
Python skills. You learned how to make your code more readable by adding
comments to your scripts.
You learned about errors and exceptions and you should be now able to tell the
difference between the both. You also learned how to handle exceptions and
make them more friendly so that the external users understands them.
Further, we explained how you can handle databases via Python. Specifically,
we created a database file, and connected to the database. You also learned how
to create database tables and table fields. Moreover, we worked with table rows,
by inserting new ones, updating, and deleting them. Finally, you learned how to
query data from the database table and use the queried data in Python.
Lastly, we covered regular expressions and you learned various ways of how to
search for a pattern in a text.
Assignment
Exercise 1
In this exercise you will be able to practice exception handling, databases, and
commenting. The exercise requires that you write a script that does the
following:
         1. Creates and connect to a database
         2. Creates a database table called computer with three fields: brand,
            disk, and screen where brand is text type, while disk and screen are
            integers.
         3. Inserts three rows of data into the table
In addition, you should write the code using the try – except clause to handle the
sqlite3 exception referred to as sqlite3.OperationalError. Also, enrich your
script by adding a header multiline comment and single line comments where
you see it appropriate to explain what your lines of code do.
Exercise 2
The following script searches for a pattern and displays a message notifying
whether the pattern was found or not.
import re text = "Here is some text that contains something."
pattern = "that"
if re.search(pattern, text): print("Yes, %s was found in the text" % pattern) else: print("No, %s was not
found in the text" % pattern) The message printed out in this case would be: Yes, that was
not found in the text Try to improve that message by displaying something like this
instead: Yes, 'that' was found in the text spanning from index 18 to 22

Hint: Make use of string formatting, and the start and end methods of the match
object.
Solution for Exercise 1
"""This script creates a database table having three fields, and populates the table with one row."""

import sqlite3
#Here we try to execute the SQL commands try: #connect to database db =
sqlite3.connect('C:/examples/mydb.db') #delete table if it exists db.execute('drop table if exists computers')
#create table db.execute('create table computers ( brand text, disk int, screen int)') #insert rows
db.execute('insert into computers (brand, disk, screen) values ("Cosmos", 512, 22)') db.execute('insert into
computers (brand, disk, screen) values ("Beta", 1024, 18)') db.execute('insert into computers (brand, disk,
screen) values ("Europa", 512, 19)') #save changes db.commit() except sqlite3.OperationalError: #printing
a message if an SQL error occurs print("You have something wrong in the SQL declaration")

Solution for Exercise 2
import re text = "Here is some text that contains something."
pattern = "that"
match = re.search(pattern, text) if match: print("Yes, '%s' was found in the text spanning from index %s to
%s" % (pattern,match.start(),match.end())) else: print("No, %s was not found in the text" % pattern)
Chapter 11: Conclusion
This chapter concludes this book on Python programming for beginners. We had
to start from the very beginning by explaining what Python is and what you can
do with it. Now that you have read the book, you probably have more clear ideas
on how you can use Python to suit the needs on your specific field. Whatever
your interest is, the chapters of this book should have been a great source to get
you started with Python because the concepts and the techniques you have
learned here can be applied in every kind of application field. This could be web
development, database access, desktop applications, scientific computations,
network programming or game development. Without doubt you will be using
variables, functions, conditionals, loops, and modules to mention a few, as the
building blocks of your programs because whatever the purpose of your program
is, you will always need these basic elements to build it up.
One advanced aspect that this book taught you was classes. Classes are often
deemed as advanced not because their relatively complex syntax, but because it
is difficult for a beginner to imagine scenarios where you would use a class as
the main building block for your programs. Classes are mostly used when
writing long programs, so they provide a way to have the most basic elements
such as variables and functions more organized. You will mostly be able to solve
your Python problems by simply using functions and simple statements, but
whenever you're ready to build a larger program, classes are there for you to use.
As you build programs, you will better understand how all the elements work
together to make flawless scripts of code. That said it is generally a better idea to
design your programs with classes in mind.
When talking about specialized functionalities, we have to look further away and
call external modules and packages to use in our scripts. In this book we
mentioned a few specialized modules such as tkinter which is used to produce
graphical interfaces for your programs. We also looked at sqlite3 which is used
whenever you need to interact with a database be it local or on a remote server.
You learned about regular expressions which are the tool to use when dealing
with text processing. Using online resources, you will be able to discover on
your own the modules that have the necessary functionalities to implement the
special features of your programs. However, we could mention some of the
modules that are used for each of the Python application fields.
If you're fond of web development, you would need one of the frameworks such
as Django, Pyramid, Flask or Bottle. With Django being the most popular, all
these frameworks will provide you a good ground where you don't have to start
from scratch for building your web applications.
If you will be dealing with network interfaces and protocols, you might have to
work with the socket library which provides a low-level networking interface.
Twisted is also another event-driven network programming framework that you
can use in Python for network engineering.
Python can also be used to build desktop applications. The tkinter library is one
option you can use to build graphical interfaces with Python. Other libraries that
are also used by the community are wxWidgets and pyqt. They all do the works,
but one can build things with more clear code than the other, or it can offer a
nicer look of the graphical interfaces they produce.
Python is also popular for game development and you can make modern high
quality games using the specialized Python libraries. The PyGame package is a
good library that will generally satisfy most of your needs. Pyglet, PyWeek and
Panda3D are also other options to be considered.
Lastly, Python is great for scientific and numeric applications. We could
mention the SciPy library here which is a collection of packages used for
mathematics, science and engineering. Pandas is also a library used for data
analysis and modelling. Python is also used to visualize data through its
matplotlib library.
In almost any case you will be able to install these libraries by just executing the
pip command in your computer command line just as you learned in chapter 8 of
this book. There are some cases however, where you will need to download the
packages from their websites and install them manually. Once you have installed
them in on or the other way, packages and modules can be used following the
same concepts that you learned in the book, and can suit almost any
programming need that you have.
This is all about to get you started with Python. Python is truly a highly efficient
and fun language. Good luck with any of the application fields you have chosen
to handle with Python.
This book has found you because you have the ultimate potential.
It may be easy to think and feel that you are limited but the truth is you are more
than what you have assumed you are. We have been there. We have been in such
a situation: when giving up or settling with what is comfortable feels like the
best choice. Luckily, the heart which is the dwelling place for passion has told us
otherwise.
It was in 2014 when our team was created. Our compass was this – the dream of
coming up with books that can spread knowledge and education about
programming. The goal was to reach as many people across the world. For them
to learn how to program and in the process, find solutions, perform mathematical
calculations, show graphics and images, process and store data and much more.
Our whole journey to make such dream come true has been very pivotal in our
individual lives. We believe that a dream shared becomes a reality.
We want you to be part of this journey, of this wonderful reality. We want to
make learning programming easy and fun for you. In addition, we want to open
your eyes to the truth that programming can be a start-off point for more
beautiful things in your life.
Programming may have this usual stereotype of being too geeky and too
stressful. We would like to tell you that nowadays, we enjoy this lifestyle: surf-
program-read-write-eat. How amazing is that? If you enjoy this kind of life, we
assure you that nothing is impossible and that like us, you can also make
programming a stepping stone to unlock your potential to solve problems,
maximize solutions, and enjoy the life that you truly deserve.
This book has found you because you are at the brink of everything fantastic!
Thanks for reading!
You can be interested in: “Python: Learn Python Regular Expressions FAST!”
Here is our full library: http://amzn.to/1HPABQI


To your success, Acodemy.
