the art of


              with Examples in .NET




    MANNING        ROY OSHEROVE
Early Praise for The Art of Unit Testing

     “The Art of Unit Testing provides a thorough,
incremental introduction to writing tests as part of the
 programming process. Programmers looking to write
  their first test will find easy-to-follow instructions,
while those who have been testing for a while will find
            ideas for refining their technique”
           —Kent Beck, Three Rivers Institute

“Beautifully crafted, detailed unit testing masterpiece.
                 Bravo, Bravo, Bravo!”
  —Mohammad Azam, Microsoft MVP, HighOnCoding

   “This book tells all the truth about unit testing,
           even the unpleasant side of it.”
        —Franco Lombardo, Molteni Informatica

                 “Roy knows testing.”
          —Wendy Friedlander, Agile Solutions

   “Unit testing, directly from theory to practice.”
          —Francesco Goggi, Software Engineer




  Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
          The Art of Unit Testing
               with Examples in .NET




Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
The Art of Unit Testing
with Examples in .NET


                                                    Roy Osherove




                                                       MANNING
                                                              Greenwich
                                                            (74° w. long.)




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
For online information and ordering of this and other Manning books, please visit
www.manning.com. The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in
quantity. For more information, please contact:
    Special Sales Department
    Manning Publications Co.
    Sound View Court 3B                fax: (609) 877-8256
    Greenwich, CT 06830              email: manning@manning.com
©2009 by Manning Publications Co. All rights reserved.


No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, or otherwise, without
prior written permission of the publisher. Figure 3.2 is reproduced with permission from
NASA.


Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products
are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in the book, and Manning
Publications was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial
caps or all caps.


Recognizing the importance of preserving what has been written, it is Manning’s policy to
have the books we publish printed on acid-free paper, and we exert our best efforts to that
end. Recognizing also our responsibility to conserve the resources of our planet, Manning
books are printed on paper that is at least 15% recycled and processed without the use of
elemental chlorine.




      Manning Publications Co.          Development Editor: Nermina Miller
      209 Bruce Park Avenue                     Copyeditor: Andy Carroll
      Greenwich, CT 06830                      Proofreader: Anna Welles
                                                 Typesetter: Marija Tudor
                                             Cover designer: Leslie Haimes


ISBN: 978-1-933988-27-6


Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 – MAL – 14 13 12 11 10 09




                 Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
      To my wife, Tal, and my sons,
      Itamar and Aviv—my family




Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Brief contents

PART 1 GETTING STARTED 1
       1   ❍   The basics of unit testing     3
       2   ❍   A first unit test     21

PART 2 CORE TECHNIQUES 47
       3   ❍   Using stubs to break dependencies      49
       4   ❍   Interaction testing using mock objects        82
       5   ❍   Isolation (mock object) frameworks      99

PART 3 THE TEST CODE 139
       6   ❍   Test hierarchies and organization     141
       7   ❍   The pillars of good tests    171

PART 4 DESIGN AND PROCESS 217
       8   ❍   Integrating unit testing into the organization     219
       9   ❍   Working with legacy code     239




                                   vii



       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Contents

       foreword xv
       preface xvii
       acknowledgments xix
       about this book xx
       about the cover illustration xxiii


PART 1 GETTING STARTED 1
    1 The basics of unit testing             3
       1.1   Unit testing—the classic definition 4
               The importance of writing “good” unit tests   5 ❍ We’ve
               all written unit tests (sort of) 5
       1.2 Properties of a good unit test 6
       1.3 Integration tests 7
               Drawbacks of integration tests compared to
               automated unit tests 9
       1.4   Good unit test—a definition 11
       1.5   A simple unit test example 12
       1.6   Test-driven development 16
       1.7   Summary 19

    2 A first unit test         21
       2.1 Frameworks for unit testing         22
               What unit-testing frameworks offer    22 ❍ The xUnit
               frameworks 25

                                      ix



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
x      Contents




            2.2 Introducing the LogAn project       25
            2.3 First steps with NUnit 26
                   Installing NUnit 26 ❍ Loading up the solution 26
                   ❍ Using the NUnit attributes in your code  29
            2.4 Writing our first test       30
                   The Assert class 31   Running our first test with
                                         ❍

                   NUnit 32 ❍ Fixing our code and passing the
                   test 33 ❍ From red to green 33
            2.5 More NUnit attributes        34
                   Setup and teardown 34 ❍ Checking for expected
                   exceptions 36 ❍ Ignoring tests 38 ❍ Setting
                   test categories 39
            2.6 Indirect testing of state 40
            2.7 Summary 44

    PART 2 CORE TECHNIQUES 47
        3 Using stubs to break dependencies                    49
            3.1 Introducing stubs 50
            3.2 Identifying a filesystem dependency in LogAn 51
            3.3 Determining how to easily test LogAnalyzer 52
            3.4 Refactoring our design to be more testable 55
                   Extract an interface to allow replacing underlying
                   implementation 55 ❍ Inject stub implementation
                   into a class under test 58 ❍ Receive an
                   interface at the constructor level (constructor
                   injection) 58 ❍ Receive an interface as a property
                   get or set 64 ❍ Getting a stub just before a
                   method call 66
            3.5 Variations on refactoring techniques       74
                   Using Extract and Override to create stub
                   results 75
            3.6 Overcoming the encapsulation problem           77
                   Using internal and [InternalsVisibleTo] 78 ❍
                   Using the [Conditional] attribute 79 ❍ Using #if
                   and #endif with conditional compilation 80
            3.7 Summary      80




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                             Contents         xi




4 Interaction testing using mock objects                    82
   4.1 State-based versus interaction testing 83
   4.2 The difference between mocks and stubs 84
   4.3 A simple manual mock example 87
   4.4 Using a mock and a stub together 89
   4.5 One mock per test 94
   4.6 Stub chains: stubs that produce mocks or other stubs              95
   4.7 The problems with handwritten mocks and stubs 96
   4.8 Summary 97

5 Isolation (mock object) frameworks                   99
   5.1 Why use isolation frameworks? 100
   5.2 Dynamically creating a fake object 102
          Introducing Rhino Mocks into your tests 102 ❍
          Replacing a handwritten mock object with
          a dynamic one 103
   5.3 Strict versus nonstrict mock objects        106
          Strict mocks 106 ❍ Nonstrict mocks       107
   5.4 Returning values from fake objects 108
   5.5 Creating smart stubs with an isolation framework            110
          Creating a stub in Rhino Mocks 110 ❍ Combining
          dynamic stubs and mocks 112
   5.6 Parameter constraints for mocks and stubs             115
          Checking parameters with string constraints 115 ❍
          Checking parameter object properties with
          constraints 118 ❍ Executing callbacks for
          parameter verification 120
   5.7 Testing for event-related activities      121
          Testing that an event has been subscribed to 122 ❍
          Triggering events from mocks and stubs 123 ❍
          Testing whether an event was triggered 124
   5.8 Arrange-act-assert syntax for isolation 126
   5.9 Current isolation frameworks for .NET 130
          NUnit.Mocks 130 ❍ NMock 131 ❍ NMock2 131
          ❍ Typemock Isolator 132 ❍ Rhino Mocks 132 ❍
          Moq 134




    Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
xii   Contents




           5.10 Advantages of isolation frameworks 134
           5.11 Traps to avoid when using isolation frameworks            135
                   Unreadable test code 135 ❍ Verifying the wrong
                   things 136 ❍ Having more than one mock per
                   test 136 ❍ Overspecifying the tests 136
           5.12 Summary       137

  PART 3 THE TEST CODE 139
      6 Test hierarchies and organization                  141
           6.1 Having automated builds run automated tests                142
                   Anatomy of an automated build 142 ❍ Triggering
                   builds and continuous integration 144 ❍
                   Automated build types 144
           6.2 Mapping out tests based on speed and type             145
                   The human factor of separating unit from integration
                   tests 146 ❍ The safe green zone 147
           6.3 Ensuring tests are part of source control 148
           6.4 Mapping test classes to code under test 148
                   Mapping tests to projects 148 ❍ Mapping tests
                   to classes 149 ❍ Mapping tests to specific
                   methods 150
           6.5 Building a test API for your application        150
                   Using test class inheritance patterns 151 ❍
                   Creating test utility classes and methods 167 ❍
                   Making your API known to developers 168
           6.6 Summary        169

       7 The pillars of good tests             171
           7.1   Writing trustworthy tests      172
                   Deciding when to remove or change tests 172 ❍
                   Avoiding logic in tests 178 ❍ Testing only one
                   thing 179 ❍ Making tests easy to run 180 ❍
                   Assuring code coverage 180
           7.2 Writing maintainable tests        181
                   Testing private or protected methods 182 ❍
                   Removing duplication 184 ❍ Using setup methods
                   in a maintainable manner 188 ❍ Enforcing test
                   isolation 191 ❍ Avoiding multiple asserts 198 ❍




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                 Contents    xiii




              Avoiding testing multiple aspects of the same
              object 202 ❍ Avoiding overspecification in
              tests 205
       7.3 Writing readable tests      209
              Naming unit tests 210 ❍ Naming variables 211 ❍
              Asserting yourself with meaning 212 ❍ Separating
              asserts from actions 214 ❍ Setting up and tearing
              down 214
       7.4 Summary        215

PART 4 DESIGN AND PROCESS 217
    8 Integrating unit testing into the organization                   219
       8.1 Steps to becoming an agent of change          220
              Be prepared for the tough questions 220 ❍
              Convince insiders: champions and blockers 220 ❍
              Identify possible entry points 222
       8.2 Ways to succeed       223
              Guerrilla implementation (bottom-up) 223 ❍
              Convincing management (top-down) 224 ❍
              Getting an outside champion 224 ❍ Making
              progress visible 225 ❍ Aiming for specific goals
              227 ❍ Realizing that there will be hurdles 228
       8.3 Ways to fail    229
              Lack of a driving force 229 ❍ Lack of political
              support 229 ❍ Bad implementations and first
              impressions 230 ❍ Lack of team support 230
       8.4 Tough questions and answers         231
              How much time will this add to the current
              process? 231 ❍ Will my QA job be at risk because
              of this? 233 ❍ How do we know this is actually
              working? 234 ❍ Is there proof that unit testing
              helps? 234 ❍ Why is the QA department still
              finding bugs? 235 ❍ We have lots of code without
              tests: where do we start? 235 ❍ We work in several
              languages: is unit testing feasible? 236 ❍ What if
              we develop a combination of software and
              hardware? 236 ❍ How can we know we don’t have
              bugs in our tests? 236 ❍ I see in my debugger that
              my code works fine: why do I need tests? 237 ❍
              Must we do TDD-style coding? 237
       8.5 Summary        238



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
xiv     Contents




        9 Working with legacy code            239
             9.1 Where do you start adding tests? 240
             9.2 Choosing a selection strategy 242
                    Pros and cons of the easy-first strategy 242 ❍
                    Pros and cons of the hard-first strategy 243
             9.3 Writing integration tests before refactoring 244
             9.4 Important tools for legacy code unit testing 246
                    Isolate dependencies easily with Typemock
                    Isolator 246 ❍ Find testability problems with
                    Depender 248 ❍ Use JMockit for Java legacy
                    code 248 ❍ Use Vise while refactoring your Java
                    code 250 ❍ Use FitNesse for acceptance tests
                    before you refactor 251 ❍ Read Michael Feathers’
                    book on legacy code 253 ❍ Use NDepend to
                    investigate your production code 253 ❍ Use
                    ReSharper to navigate and refactor production
                    code 253 ❍ Detect duplicate code (and bugs) with
                    Simian 254 ❍ Detect threading issues with
                    Typemock Racer 254
             9.5 Summary      254

Appendix A         Design and testability        256
Appendix B         Extra tools and frameworks           268
Index              284




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Foreword

  When Roy Osherove told me that he was working on a book about unit
  testing, I was very happy to hear it. The testing meme has been rising in
  the industry for years, but there has been a relative dearth of material
  available about unit testing. When I look at my bookshelf, I see books that
  are about test-driven development specifically and books about testing in
  general, but until now there has been no comprehensive reference for unit
  testing—no book that introduces the topic and guides the reader from first
  steps to widely accepted best practices. The fact that this is true is stun-
  ning. Unit testing isn’t a new practice. How did we get to this point?
  It’s almost a cliché to say that we work in a very young industry, but it’s
  true. Mathematicians laid the foundations of our work less than 100 years
  ago, but we’ve only had hardware fast enough to exploit their insights for
  the last 60 years. There was an initial gap between theory and practice in
  our industry, and we’re only now discovering how it has impacted our field.
  In the early days, machine cycles were expensive. We ran programs in
  batches. Programmers had a scheduled time slot, and they had to punch
  their programs into decks of cards and walk them to the machine room. If
  your program wasn’t right, you lost your time, so you desk-checked your
  program with pencil and paper, mentally working out all of the scenarios,
  all of the edge cases. I doubt the notion of automated unit testing was
  even imaginable. Why use the machine for testing when you could use it
  to solve the problems it was meant to solve? Scarcity kept us in the dark.
  Later, machines became faster and we became intoxicated with interac-
  tive computing. We could just type in code and change it on a whim. The

                                   xv



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
xvi   Foreword




      idea of desk-checking code faded away, and we lost some of the disci-
      pline of the early years. We knew programming was hard, but that just
      meant that we had to spend more time at the computer, changing lines
      and symbols until we found the magical incantation that worked.
      We went from scarcity to surplus and missed the middle ground, but
      now we’re regaining it. Automated unit testing marries the discipline of
      desk-checking with a newfound appreciation for the computer as a
      development resource. We can write automated tests, in the language
      we develop in, to check our work—not just once, but as often as we’re
      able to run them. I don’t think there is any other practice that’s quite as
      powerful in software development.
      As I write this, in 2009, I’m happy to see Roy’s book come into print.
      It’s a practical guide that will help you get started and also serve as a
      great reference as you go about your testing tasks. The Art of Unit Testing
      isn’t a book about idealized scenarios. It teaches you how to test code as
      it exists in the field, how to take advantage of widely used frameworks,
      and, most importantly, how to write code that’s far easier to test.
      The Art of Unit Testing is an important title that should have been written
      years ago, but we weren’t ready then. We are ready now. Enjoy.

                                                           MICHAEL FEATHERS
                                                               SENIOR CONSULTANT
                                                                  OBJECT MENTOR




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Preface

  One of the biggest failed projects I worked on had unit tests. Or so I
  thought. I was leading a group of programmers creating a billing applica-
  tion, and we were doing it in a fully test-driven manner—writing the test,
  then writing the code, seeing the test fail, making the test pass, refactor-
  ing, and starting all over again.
  The first few months of the project were great. Things were going well,
  and we had tests that proved that our code worked. But as time went by,
  requirements changed. We were forced to change our code to fit those
  new requirements, and when we did, tests broke and had to be fixed. The
  code still worked, but the tests we wrote were so brittle that any little
  change in our code broke them, even though the code was working fine.
  It became a daunting task to change code in a class or method because we
  also had to fix all the related unit tests.
  Worse yet, some tests became unusable because the people who wrote
  them left the project and no one knew how to maintain the tests, or what
  they were testing. The names we gave our unit-testing methods were not
  clear enough, and we had tests relying on other tests. We ended up
  throwing out most of the tests less than six months into the project.
  The project was a miserable failure because we let the tests we wrote do
  more harm than good. They took more time to maintain and understand
  than they saved us in the long run, so we stopped using them. I moved on
  to other projects, where we did a better job writing our unit tests, and we
  had some great successes using them, saving huge amounts of debugging
  and integration time. Ever since that first failed project, I’ve been compil-

                                   xvii



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
xviii   Preface




        ing best practices for unit tests and using them on subsequent projects.
        I find a few more best practices with every project I work on.
        Understanding how to write unit tests—and how to make them main-
        tainable, readable, and trustworthy—is what this book is about, no mat-
        ter what language or integrated development environment (IDE) you
        work with. This book covers the basics of writing a unit test, moves on
        to the basics of interaction testing, and then introduces best practices
        for writing, managing, and maintaining unit tests in the real world.




                  Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Acknowledgments

  A big thank you to Michael Stephens and Nermina Miller at Manning,
  who were patient with me every step of the long way in writing this book.
  Thank you Jim Newkirk, Michael Feathers, Gerard Meszaros, and many
  others, who provided me with inspiration and the ideas that made this
  book what it is. And a special thank you to Michael for agreeing to write
  the foreword to the book.
  The following reviewers read the manuscript at various stages during its
  development. I’d like to thank them for providing valuable feedback:
  Svetlana Christopher, Wendy Friedlander, Jay Flowers, Jean-Paul S.
  Boodhoo, Armand du Plessis, James Kovacs, Carlo Bottiglieri, Ken
  DeLong, Dusty Jewett, Lester Lobo, Alessandro Gallo, Gabor Paller,
  Eric Raymond, David Laribee, Christian Siegers, Phil Hanna, Josh
  Cronemeyer, Mark Seemann, Francesco Goggi, Franco Lambardo, Dave
  Nicolette, and Mohammad Azam. Thanks also to Rod Coffin, who did a
  technical proofread of the final manuscript shortly before it went to press.
  A final word of thanks to the early readers of the book in Manning’s
  Early Access Program for their comments in the online forum. You
  helped shape the book.




                                   xix



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
About this book

How to use this book
     If you’ve never written unit tests before, this book is best read from start
     to finish so you get the full picture. If you already have experience, you
     should feel comfortable jumping into the chapters as you see fit.

Who should read this book
     The book is for anyone who writes code and is interested in learning best
     practices for unit testing. All the examples are written in C# using Visual
     Studio 2008, so .NET developers will find the examples particularly use-
     ful. But the lessons I teach apply equally to most, if not all, statically
     typed object-oriented languages (VB.NET, Java, and C++, to name a
     few). If you’re a developer, team lead, QA engineer (who writes code), or
     novice programmer, this book should suit you well.

Roadmap
     The book is divided into four parts.
     Part 1 takes you from zero to sixty in writing unit tests. Chapters 1 and 2
     cover the basics, such as how to use a testing framework (NUnit), and
     introduce the basic automated test attributes, such as [SetUp] and [Tear-
     Down]. They also introduce the ideas of asserts, ignoring tests, and state-
     based testing.
     Part 2 discusses advanced techniques for breaking dependencies: mock
     objects, stubs, mock frameworks, and patterns for refactoring your code
     to use them. Chapter 3 introduces the idea of stubs and shows how to

                                      xx



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         About this book     xxi




     manually create and use them. Chapter 4 introduces interaction testing
     with handwritten mock objects. Chapter 5 merges these two concepts
     and shows how isolation (mock) frameworks combine these two ideas
     and allow them to be automated.
     Part 3 talks about ways to organize test code, patterns for running and
     refactoring its structure, and best practices when writing tests. Chapter
     6 discusses test hierarchies, how to use test infrastructure APIs, and
     how to combine tests in the automated build process. Chapter 7 dis-
     cusses best practices in unit testing for creating maintainable, readable,
     and trustworthy tests.
     Part 4 talks about how to implement change in an organization and
     how to work on existing code. Chapter 8 discusses problems and solu-
     tions you would encounter when trying to introduce unit testing into
     an organization. It also identifies and answers some questions you
     might be asked. Chapter 9 talks about introducing unit testing into
     existing code. It identifies a couple of ways to determine where to begin
     testing and discusses some tools for testing untestable code.
     Finally, there are two appendixes. Appendix A discusses the loaded
     topic of designing for testability and the other alternatives that exist
     today. Appendix B has a list of tools you might find useful in your test-
     ing efforts.

Code conventions and downloads
     You can download the source code for this book from the book’s site at
     www.ArtOfUnitTesting.com, as well as from the publisher’s website at
     www.manning.com/TheArtofUnitTesting.
     All source code in listings or in the text is in a fixed-width font like
     this to separate it from ordinary text. In listings, bold code indicates
     code that has changed from the previous example, or that will change
     in the next example.
     Code annotations accompany some of the listings, highlighting impor-
     tant concepts. In some cases, numbered bullets link to explanations
     that follow in the text.




           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
xxii   About this book




Software requirements
       To use the code in this book, you need at least Visual Studio C#
       Express (which is free), or a more advanced version of it (Professional
       or Team Suite, for example). You’ll also need NUnit (an open source
       and free framework) and other tools that will be referenced where
       they’re relevant. All the tools mentioned are either free, open source, or
       have trial versions you can use freely as you read this book.

Author Online
       The purchase of The Art of Unit Testing includes free access to a private
       forum run by Manning Publications where you can make comments
       about the book, ask technical questions, and receive help from the
       authors and other users. To access and subscribe to the forum, point
       your browser to www.manning.com/TheArtofUnitTesting. This page
       provides information on how to get on the forum once you are regis-
       tered, what kind of help is available, and the rules of conduct in the
       forum.
       Manning’s commitment to our readers is to provide a venue where a
       meaningful dialogue between individual readers and between readers
       and the author can take place. It’s not a commitment to any specific
       amount of participation on the part of the author, whose contribution
       to the book’s forum remains voluntary (and unpaid). We suggest you
       try asking him some challenging questions, lest his interest stray!
       The Author Online forum and the archives of previous discussions will
       be accessible from the publisher’s website as long as the book is in print.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
About the cover illustration

  The figure on the cover of The Art of Unit Testing is a “Japonais en Costume
  de Cérémonie,” a Japanese man in ceremonial dress. The illustration is
  taken from James Prichard’s Natural History of Man, a book of hand-colored
  lithographs published in England in 1847. It was found by our cover
  designer in an antique shop in San Francisco.
  Prichard began the research for his study of the natives of the world in
  1813. By the time his work was published 34 years later, he had gathered
  much of the available research about various peoples and nations, and his
  work became an important foundation for modern ethnological science.
  Included in Prichard’s history were portraits of different human races
  and tribes in their native dress, taken from original drawings of many art-
  ists, most based on first-hand studies.
  The lithographs from Prichard’s collection, like the other illustrations
  that appear on our covers, bring to life the richness and variety of dress
  and tribal customs of two centuries ago. Dress codes have changed since
  then, and the diversity by region, so rich at the time, has faded away. It is
  now often hard to tell the inhabitant of one continent from another, not to
  mention a country or region. Perhaps, trying to view it optimistically, we
  have traded a cultural and visual diversity for a more varied personal life.
  Or a more varied and interesting intellectual and technical life.
  We at Manning celebrate the inventiveness, the initiative, and, yes, the
  fun of the computer business with book covers based on the rich diversity
  of regional life of long ago—brought back to life by picture collections
  such as Prichard’s.

                                   xxiii



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
xxiv   About the cover illustration




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                 Part 1

                                   Getting started

    his part of the book covers the basics of unit testing.

T   In chapter 1, we’ll define what “good” unit testing means and compare
    it with integration testing, and we’ll take a brief look at test-driven
    development and its role in relation to unit testing.
    Then, in chapter 2, we’ll take a stab at writing our first unit test using
    NUnit. We’ll get to know NUnit’s basic API, how to assert things, and
    how to run the test in the NUnit test runner.




          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
 1

The basics of unit testing
     This chapter covers
            • Defining unit testing and integration testing
            • Exploring a simple unit-testing example
            • Exploring text-driven development




     here’s always a first step: the first time you wrote a program, the first time

T    you failed a project, and the first time you succeeded in what you were
     trying to accomplish. You never forget your first time, and I hope you
     won’t forget your first tests. You may have already written some tests,
     and you may even remember them as being bad, awkward, slow, or
     unmaintainable. (Most people do.) On the other hand, you may have had
     a great first experience with unit tests, and you’re reading this to see what
     more you might be missing.
     This chapter will first analyze the “classic” definition of a unit test and
     compare it to the concept of integration testing. This distinction is confus-
     ing to many. Then we’ll look at the pros and cons of each approach and
     develop a better definition of a “good” unit test. We’ll finish up with a
     look at test-driven development, because it’s often associated with unit
     testing. Throughout the chapter, we’ll also touch on various concepts that
     are explained more thoroughly elsewhere in the book.
     Let’s begin by defining what a unit test should be.



                                           3



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
4       CHAPTER 1   The basics of unit testing




    1.1 Unit testing—the classic definition
        Unit testing isn’t a new concept in software development. It’s been
        floating around since the early days of the Smalltalk programming lan-
        guage in the 1970s, and it proves itself time and time again as one of the
        best ways a developer can improve code quality while gaining a deeper
        understanding of the functional requirements of a class or method.
        Kent Beck introduced the concept of unit testing in Smalltalk, and it
        has carried on into many other programming languages, making unit
        testing an extremely useful practice in software programming. Before
        we get too far, we need to define unit testing better. Here’s the classic
        definition, from Wikipedia.

DEFINITION     A unit test is a piece of a code (usually a method) that invokes another
               piece of code and checks the correctness of some assumptions after-
               ward. If the assumptions turn out to be wrong, the unit test has failed.
               A “unit” is a method or function.

        Unit testing will be performed against a system under test (SUT).

DEFINITION     SUT stands for system under test, and some people like to use CUT (class
               under test or code under test). When we test something, we refer to the
               thing we’re testing as the SUT.

        This classic definition of a unit test, although technically correct, is
        hardly enough to enable us to better ourselves as developers. Chances
        are you already know this and are getting bored reading this definition
        again, because it appears in any book or website that discusses unit test-
        ing. Don’t worry. In this book, we’ll go beyond the classic definition of
        unit testing by addressing maintainability, readability, correctness, and
        more. But this familiar definition, precisely because it is familiar, gives
        us a shared base from which to extend the idea of a unit test.
        No matter what programming language you’re using, one of the most
        difficult aspects of defining a unit test is defining what’s meant by a
        “good” one.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                Unit testing—the classic definition   5




1.1.1   The importance of writing “good” unit tests
        Most people who try to unit-test their code either give up at some point
        or don’t actually perform unit tests. Instead, they either rely on system
        and integration tests to be performed much later in the product lifecycle
        or they resort to manually testing the code via custom test applications
        or by using the end product they’re developing to invoke their code.
        There’s no point in writing a bad unit test, unless you’re learning how
        to write a good one and these are your first steps into this field. If
        you’re going to write a unit test badly without realizing it, you may as
        well not write it at all, and save yourself the trouble it will cause down
        the road with maintainability and time schedules. By defining what a
        good unit test is, we can make sure we don’t start off with the wrong
        notion of what we’re trying to write.
        To succeed in this delicate art of unit testing, it’s essential that you not
        only have a technical definition of what unit tests are, but that you describe
        the properties of a good unit test. To understand what a good unit test is,
        we need to look at what developers do when they’re testing something.
        How do you make sure that the code works today?

1.1.2   We’ve all written unit tests (sort of)
        You may be surprised to learn this, but you’ve already implemented
        some types of unit testing on your own. Have you ever met a developer
        who has not tested his code before handing it over? Well, neither have I.
        You might have used a console application that called the various
        methods of a class or component, or perhaps some specially created
        WinForm or WebForm UI (user interface) that checked the function-
        ality of that class or component, or maybe even manual tests run by
        performing various actions within the real application’s UI. The end
        result is that you’ve made certain, to a degree, that the code works well
        enough to pass it on to someone else.
        Figure 1.1 shows how most developers test their code. The UI may
        change, but the pattern is usually the same: using a manual external
        tool to check something repeatedly, or running the application in full
        and checking its behavior manually.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
6       CHAPTER 1    The basics of unit testing




Figure 1.1 In classic testing, developers
use a GUI (graphical user interface) to
trigger an action on the class they want
to test. Then they check the results.

        These tests may have been useful, and they may come close to the clas-
        sic definition of a unit test, but they’re far from how we’ll define a good
        unit test in this book. That brings us to the first and most important
        question a developer has to face when defining the qualities of a good
        unit test: what is a unit test, and what is not.

    1.2 Properties of a good unit test
        A unit test should have the following properties:
        ❂  It should be automated and repeatable.
        ❂ It should be easy to implement.

        ❂ Once it’s written, it should remain for future use.

        ❂ Anyone should be able to run it.

        ❂ It should run at the push of a button.

        ❂ It should run quickly.

        Many people confuse the act of testing their software with the concept
        of a unit test. To start off, ask yourself the following questions about
        the tests you’ve written up to now:
        ❂   Can I run and get results from a unit test I wrote two weeks or
            months or years ago?



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         Integration tests      7




    ❂  Can any member of my team run and get the results from unit tests I
       wrote two months ago?
    ❂ Can I run all the unit tests I’ve written in no more than a few min-

       utes?
    ❂ Can I run all the unit tests I’ve written at the push of a button?

    ❂ Can I write a basic unit test in no more than a few minutes?

    If you’ve answered “no” to any of these questions, there’s a high proba-
    bility that what you’re implementing isn’t a unit test. It’s definitely some
    kind of test, and it’s as important as a unit test, but it has drawbacks com-
    pared to tests that would let you answer “yes” to all of those questions.
    “What was I doing until now?” you might ask. You’ve done integration
    testing.


1.3 Integration tests
    What happens when your car breaks down? How do you learn what
    the problem is, let alone fix it? An engine consists of many parts work-
    ing together, each relying on the others to help produce the final result:
    a moving car. If the car stops moving, the fault could be with any of
    these parts, or more than one. It’s the integration of those parts that
    makes the car move. You could think of the car’s movement as the ulti-
    mate integration test of these parts. If the test fails, all the parts fail
    together; if it succeeds, the parts all succeed.
    The same thing happens in software. The way most developers test
    their functionality is through the final functionality of the user inter-
    face. Clicking some button triggers a series of events—various classes
    and components working together to produce the final result. If the
    test fails, all of these software components fail as a team, and it can be
    difficult to figure out what caused the failure of the overall operation.
    (See figure 1.2.)
    As defined in The Complete Guide to Software Testing, by Bill Hetzel,
    integration testing is “an orderly progression of testing in which soft-
    ware and/or hardware elements are combined and tested until the entire
    system has been integrated.” That definition of integration testing falls



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
8       CHAPTER 1    The basics of unit testing




Figure 1.2 You can have many failure points in an integration test. All the units have
to work together, and each of them could malfunction, making it harder to find the
source of the bug.

        a bit short of what many people do all the time, not as part of a system
        integration test, but as part of development and unit tests.
        Here’s a better definition of integration testing.

DEFINITION     Integration testing means testing two or more dependent software mod-
               ules as a group.
        To summarize: an integration test exercises many units of code that
        work together to evaluate one or more expected results from the soft-



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                               Integration tests   9




        ware, whereas a unit test usually exercises and tests only a single unit
        in isolation.
        The questions from the beginning of section 1.2 can help you recognize
        some of the drawbacks of integration testing. Let’s look at them and try
        to define the qualities we’re looking for in a good unit test.

1.3.1   Drawbacks of integration tests compared to automated unit tests
        Let’s apply the questions from section 1.2 to integration tests, and con-
        sider what we want to achieve with real-world unit tests:
        ❂   Can I run and get results from the test I wrote two weeks or months
            or years ago?
            If you can’t do that, how would you know whether you broke a fea-
            ture that you created two weeks ago? Code changes regularly during
            the life of an application, and if you can’t (or won’t) run tests for all
            the previous working features after changing your code, you just
            might break it without knowing. I call this “accidental bugging,” and
            it seems to occur a lot near the end of a software project, when devel-
            opers are under pressure to fix existing bugs. Sometimes they intro-
            duce new bugs inadvertently as they solve the old ones. Wouldn’t it
            be great to know that you broke something within three minutes of
            breaking it? We’ll see how that can be done later in this book.
            Good tests should be easily executed in their original form, not man-
            ually.

DEFINITION      A regression is a feature that used to work and now doesn’t.

        ❂   Can any member of my team run and get the results from tests I
            wrote two months ago?
            This goes with the last point but takes it up a notch. You want to
            make sure that you don’t break someone else’s code when you
            change something. Many developers fear changing legacy code in
            older systems for fear of not knowing what other code depends on
            what they’re changing. In essence, they risk changing the system
            into an unknown state of stability.




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
10    CHAPTER 1    The basics of unit testing




          Few things are scarier than not knowing whether the application still
          works, especially when you didn’t write that code. If you knew you
          weren’t breaking anything, you’d be much less afraid of taking on
          code you’re less familiar with because you have that safety net of
          unit tests.
          Good tests can be accessed and run by anyone.
DEFINITION    Legacy code is defined by Wikipedia as “source code that relates to a no-
              longer supported or manufactured operating system or other computer
              technology,” but many shops refer to any older version of the applica-
              tion currently under maintenance as legacy code. It often refers to code
              that’s hard to work with, hard to test, and usually even hard to read.
              A client of mine once defined legacy code in a down-to-earth way:
              “code that works.” Many people like to define legacy code as “code
              that has no tests.” The book Working Effectively with Legacy Code by
              Michael Feathers uses this as an official definition of legacy code, and
              it’s a definition to be considered while reading this book.
      ❂   Can I run all the tests in no more than a few minutes?
          If you can’t run your tests quickly (seconds are better than minutes),
          you’ll run them less often (daily, or even weekly or monthly in some
          places). The problem is that, when you change code, you want to get
          feedback as early as possible to see if you broke something. The
          more time between running the tests, the more changes you make to
          the system, and the (many) more places to search for bugs when you
          find that you broke something.
          Good tests should run quickly.
      ❂   Can I run all the tests at the push of a button?
          If you can’t, it probably means that you have to configure the
          machine on which the tests will run so that they run correctly (set-
          ting connection strings to the database, for example), or that your
          unit tests aren’t fully automated. If you can’t fully automate your
          unit tests, you’ll probably avoid running them repeatedly, as will
          everyone else on your team.
          No one likes to get bogged down with configuring details to run tests
          just to make sure that the system still works. As developers, we have
          more important things to do, like writing more features into the system.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Good unit test—a definition    11




          Good tests should be easily executed in their original form, not man-
          ually.
      ❂   Can I write a basic test in no more than a few minutes?
          One of the easiest ways to spot an integration test is that it takes time
          to prepare correctly and to implement, not just to execute. It takes
          time to figure out how to write it because of all the internal and
          sometimes external dependencies. (A database may be considered an
          external dependency.) If you’re not automating the test, dependen-
          cies are less of a problem, but you’re losing all the benefits of an
          automated test. The harder it is to write a test, the less likely you are
          to write more tests, or to focus on anything other than the “big stuff”
          that you’re worried about. One of the strengths of unit tests is that
          they tend to test every little thing that might break, not only the big
          stuff. People are often surprised at how many bugs they can find in
          code they thought was simple and bug free.
          When you concentrate only on the big tests, the logic coverage that
          your tests have is smaller. Many parts of the core logic in the code
          aren’t tested (even though you may be covering more components),
          and there may be many bugs that you haven’t considered.
          Good tests against the system should be easy and quick to write.
      From what we’ve seen so far about what a unit test is not, and what fea-
      tures need to be present for testing to be useful, we can now start to
      answer the primary question this chapter poses: what is a good unit test?


 1.4 Good unit test—a definition
      Now that we’ve covered the important properties that a unit test
      should have, let’s define unit tests once and for all.

DEFINITION    A unit test is an automated piece of code that invokes the method or
              class being tested and then checks some assumptions about the logical
              behavior of that method or class. A unit test is almost always written
              using a unit-testing framework. It can be written easily and runs
              quickly. It’s fully automated, trustworthy, readable, and maintainable.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
12    CHAPTER 1    The basics of unit testing




      This definition sure looks like a tall order, particularly considering how
      many developers I’ve seen implementing unit tests poorly. It makes us
      take a hard look at the way we, as developers, have implemented test-
      ing up until now, compared to how we’d like to implement it. (“Trust-
      worthy, readable, and maintainable” tests are discussed in depth in
      chapter 7.)

DEFINITION   Logical code is any piece of code that has some sort of logic in it, small as
             it may be. It’s logical code if it has one or more of the following: an IF
             statement, a loop, switch or case statements, calculations, or any other
             type of decision-making code.

      Properties (getters/setters in Java) are good examples of code that
      usually doesn’t contain any logic, and so doesn’t require testing. But
      watch out: once you add any check inside the property, you’ll want to
      make sure that logic is being tested.
      In the next section, we’ll take a look at a simple unit test done entirely
      in code, without using any unit-testing framework. (We’ll look at unit-
      testing frameworks in chapter 2.)

 1.5 A simple unit test example
      It’s possible to write an automated unit test without using a test frame-
      work. In fact, as they have gotten more into the habit of automating
      their testing, I’ve seen plenty of developers doing this before discover-
      ing test frameworks. In this section, I’ll show what writing such a test
      without a framework can look like, so that you can contrast this with
      using a framework in chapter 2.
      Assume we have a SimpleParser class (shown in listing 1.1) that we’d
      like to test. It has a method named ParseAndSum that takes in a string of
      0 or more comma-separated numbers. If there are no numbers, it
      returns 0. If there’s a single number, it returns that number as an int. If
      there are multiple numbers, it adds them all up and returns the sum
      (although, right now, the code can only handle 0 or 1 number).




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                               A simple unit test example   13




Listing 1.1 A simple parser class to test

public class SimpleParser
    {
        public int ParseAndSum(string numbers)
        {
            if(numbers.Length==0)
            {
                return 0;
            }
            if(!numbers.Contains(","))
            {
                return int.Parse(numbers);
            }
            else
            {
                throw new InvalidOperationException(
"I can only handle 0 or 1 numbers for now!");
            }
        }
   }


We can create a simple console application project that has a reference
to the assembly containing this class, and we can write a SimplePar-
serTests method as shown in listing 1.2. The test method invokes the
production class (the class to be tested) and then checks the returned
value. If it’s not what’s expected, it writes to the console. It also catches
any exception and writes it to the console.
Listing 1.2 A simple coded method that tests the SimpleParser class

class SimpleParserTests
    {
        public static void TestReturnsZeroWhenEmptyString()
        {
            try
            {
                SimpleParser p = new SimpleParser();
                int result = p.ParseAndSum(string.Empty);
                if(result!=0)
                {




       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
14   CHAPTER 1    The basics of unit testing




     Console.WriteLine(
     @"***SimpleParserTests.TestReturnsZeroWhenEmptyString:
     -------
     Parse and sum should have returned 0 on an empty string");
                     }
                 }
                 catch (Exception e)
                 {
                     Console.WriteLine(e);
                 }
             }
         }


     Next, we can invoke the tests we’ve written by using a simple Main
     method run inside a console application in this project, as seen in listing
     1.3. The Main method is used here as a simple test runner, which
     invokes the tests one by one, letting them write out to the console.
     Because it’s an executable, this can be run without human intervention
     (assuming the tests don’t pop up any interactive user dialogs).
     Listing 1.3 Running coded tests via a simple console application

     public static void Main(string[] args)
             {
                 try
                 {
                     SimpleParserTests.TestReturnsZeroWhenEmptyString();
                 }
                 catch (Exception e)
                 {
                     Console.WriteLine(e);
                 }
             }


     It’s the test method’s responsibility to catch any exceptions that occur
     and write them to the console, so that they don’t interfere with the run-
     ning of subsequent methods. We can then add more method calls into
     the Main method as we add more and more tests to the project. Each
     test is responsible for writing the problem output (if there’s a problem)
     to the console screen.



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                               A simple unit test example   15




Obviously, this is an ad hoc way of writing such a test. If you were
writing multiple tests like this, you might want to have a generic
ShowProblem method that all tests could use, which would format the
errors consistently. You could also add special helper methods that
would help check on various things like null objects, empty strings, and
so on, so that you don’t need to write the same long lines of code in
many tests.
Listing 1.4 shows what this test would look like with a slightly more
generic ShowProblem method.
Listing 1.4 Using a more generic implementation of the ShowProblem method

public class TestUtil
    {
        public static void ShowProblem(string test,string message )
        {
            string msg = string.Format(@"
---{0}---
       {1}
--------------------
", test, message);
            Console.WriteLine(msg);
        }
    }

public static void TestReturnsZeroWhenEmptyString()
        {
            //use .NET's reflection API to get the current
                                                   method's name
            // it's possible to hard code this,
            //but it’s a useful technique to know
            string testName = MethodBase.GetCurrentMethod().Name;
            try
            {
                SimpleParser p = new SimpleParser();
                int result = p.ParseAndSum(string.Empty);
                if(result!=0)
                {
            //Calling the helper method
                    TestUtil.ShowProblem(testName,
"Parse and sum should have returned 0 on an empty string");




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
16   CHAPTER 1      The basics of unit testing




                        }
                    }
                    catch (Exception e)
                    {
                        TestUtil.ShowProblem(testName, e.ToString());
                    }
              }


     Unit-testing frameworks can help make helper methods more generic
     like this, so tests are written more easily. We’ll talk about that in chapter
     2. But before we get there, I’d like to discuss one important matter: not
     just how you write a unit test, but when during the development process
     you write it. That’s where test-driven development comes into play.

 1.6 Test-driven development
     Once we know how to write structured, maintainable, and solid tests
     with a unit-testing framework, the next question is when to write the
     tests. Many people feel that the best time to write unit tests for soft-
     ware is after the software has been written, but a growing number of
     people prefer writing unit tests before the production code is written.
     This approach is called test-first or test-driven development (TDD).

     NOTE        There are many different views on exactly what test-driven develop-
                 ment means. Some say it’s test-first development, and some say it
                 means you have a lot of tests. Some say it’s a way of designing, and
                 others feel it could be a way to drive your code’s behavior with only
                 some design. For a more complete look at the different views people
                 have of TDD, see “The various meanings of TDD” on my blog
                 (http://weblogs.asp.net/rosherove/archive/2007/10/08/the-various-
                 meanings-of-tdd.aspx). In this book, TDD means test-first develop-
                 ment, with design taking a secondary role in the technique (which
                 isn’t discussed in this book).

     Figures 1.3 and 1.4 show the differences between traditional coding
     and test-driven development.




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         Test-driven development       17




Figure 1.3 The traditional way of writing unit tests.
The dotted lines represent actions people treat as optional.


 Start




                                                            Figure 1.4 Test-driven
                                                            development—a
                                                            bird’s-eye view. Notice
                                                            the spiral nature of the
                                                            process: write test, write
                                                            code, refactor, write next
                                                            test. It shows the
                                                            incremental nature of
                                                            TDD: small steps lead
                                                            to a quality end result.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
18   CHAPTER 1      The basics of unit testing




     Test-driven development is different from traditional development, as
     figure 1.4 shows. You begin by writing a test that fails; then you move
     on to creating the production code, seeing the test pass, and continuing
     on to either refactor your code or to create another failing test.
     This book focuses on the technique of writing good unit tests, rather
     than on test-driven development, but I’m a big fan of doing test-driven
     development. I’ve written several major applications and frameworks
     using TDD, have managed teams that utilize it, and have taught more
     than a hundred courses and workshops on TDD and unit-testing tech-
     niques. Throughout my career, I’ve found TDD to be helpful in creat-
     ing quality code, quality tests, and better designs for the code I was
     writing. I am convinced that it can work to your benefit, but it’s not
     without a price (time to learn, time to implement, and more). It’s defi-
     nitely worth the admission price, though.
     It’s important to realize that TDD doesn’t ensure project success or
     tests that are robust or maintainable. It’s quite easy to get caught up in
     the technique of TDD and not pay attention to the way unit tests are
     written: their naming, how maintainable or readable they are, and
     whether they test the right things or might have bugs. That’s why I’m
     writing this book.
     The technique of test-driven development is quite simple:
     1   Write a failing test to prove code or functionality is missing from the end product.
         The test is written as if the production code were already working, so
         the test failing means there’s a bug in the production code. For
         example, if I wanted to add a new feature to a calculator class that
         remembers the LastSum value, I would write a test that verifies that
         LastSum is indeed a number. The test will fail because we haven’t
         implemented that functionality yet.
     2   Make the test pass by writing production code that meets the expectations of your test.
         It should be written as simply as possible.
     3   Refactor your code.
         When the test passes, you’re free to move on to the next unit test or
         to refactor your code to make it more readable, to remove code dupli-
         cation, and so on.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                  Summary         19




      Refactoring can be done after writing several tests or after writing each
      test. It’s an important practice, because it ensures your code gets easier
      to read and maintain, while still passing all of the previously written tests.

DEFINITION   Refactoring means changing a piece of code without changing its func-
             tionality. If you’ve ever renamed a method, you’ve done refactoring. If
             you’ve ever split a large method into multiple smaller method calls,
             you’ve refactored your code. The code still does the same thing, but it
             becomes easier to maintain, read, debug, and change.
      The preceding steps sound technical, but there’s a lot of wisdom behind
      them. Done correctly, TDD can make your code quality soar, decrease
      the number of bugs, raise your confidence in the code, shorten the time
      it takes to find bugs, improve your code’s design, and keep your man-
      ager happier. If TDD is done incorrectly, it can cause your project
      schedule to slip, waste your time, lower your motivation, and lower
      your code quality. It’s a double-edged sword, and many people find
      this out the hard way.

 1.7 Summary
      In this chapter, we defined a good unit test as one that has these quali-
      ties:
      ❂  It’s an automated piece of code that invokes a different method and
         then checks some assumptions on the logical behavior of that
         method or class.
      ❂ It’s written using a unit-testing framework.

      ❂ It can be written easily.

      ❂ It runs quickly.

      ❂ It can be executed repeatedly by anyone on the development team.

      To understand what a unit is, we had to figure out what sort of testing
      we’ve done until now. We identified that type of testing as integration
      testing because it tests a set of units that depend on each other.
      The difference between unit tests and integration tests is important to
      recognize. You’ll be using that knowledge in your day-to-day life as a



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
20   CHAPTER 1   The basics of unit testing




     developer when deciding where to place your tests, what kind of tests
     to write when, and which option is better for a specific problem. It will
     also help you identify how to fix problems with tests that are already
     causing you headaches.
     We also looked at the cons of doing integration testing without a
     framework behind it: this kind of testing is hard to write and automate,
     slow to run, and needs configuration. Although you do want to have
     integration tests in a project, unit tests can provide a lot of value earlier
     in the process, when bugs are smaller and easier to find, and there’s less
     code to skim through.
     Lastly, we talked about test-driven development, how it’s different
     from traditional coding, and what its basic benefits are. TDD helps you
     make sure that the code coverage of your test code (how much of the
     code your tests exercise) is very high (close to 100 percent of logical
     code). It helps you make sure that your tests can be trusted by making
     sure that they fail when the production code isn’t there, and that they
     pass when the production code works. TDD also has many other bene-
     fits, such as aiding in design, reducing complexity, and helping you
     tackle hard problems step by step. But you can’t do TDD without
     knowing how to write good tests.
     If you write tests after writing the code, you assume the test is OK
     because it passes, when it could be that you have bugs in your tests.
     Trust me—finding bugs in your tests is one of the most frustrating
     things you can imagine. It’s important that you don’t let your tests get
     to that state, and TDD is one of the best ways I know to keep that pos-
     sibility close to zero.
     In the next chapter, we’ll start writing our first unit tests using NUnit,
     the de facto unit-testing framework for .NET developers.




           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
2

A first unit test
    This chapter covers
           • Exploring unit-testing frameworks in .NET
           • Writing our first test with NUnit
           • Working with the NUnit attributes
           • Understanding indirect state testing




    hen I first started writing unit tests with a real unit-testing framework,

W   there was little documentation, and the frameworks I worked with did
    not have proper examples. (I was mostly coding in VB 5 and 6 at the
    time.) It was a challenge learning to work with them, and I started out
    writing rather poor tests. Fortunately, times have changed.
    This chapter will get you started writing tests even if you have no idea
    where to start. It will get you well on your way to writing real-world unit
    tests with a framework called NUnit—a .NET unit-testing framework.
    It’s my favorite framework in .NET for unit testing because it’s easy to
    use, easy to remember, and has lots of great features.
    There are other frameworks in .NET, including some with more features,
    but NUnit is where I always start. I sometimes then expand to a different
    framework if the need arises. We’ll look at how NUnit works, its syntax,
    and how to run it and get feedback when the test fails or passes. To accom-
    plish this, I’ll introduce a small software project that we’ll use throughout
    the book to explore the testing techniques and best practices.

                                         21



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
22      CHAPTER 2      A first unit test




        First, we need to look at what a unit-testing framework is, and at what
        it enables us to do that we couldn’t and wouldn’t have done without it.

 2.1 Frameworks for unit testing
        Consider the advantages an integrated development environment
        (IDE) gives you as a developer. Unit-testing frameworks offer similar
        advantages for testing.
        To this day, in many IDEs for other environments (such as Unix), the
        steps involved in getting a final binary output from your code aren’t as
        simple, and may require manually calling other external tools to do
        parts of this big task. When using a modern IDE like Visual Studio
        .NET or Eclipse for Java, you do all your coding tasks within that
        environment, in a structured manner. You write the code, you compile
        it, you build any resources (like graphics and text) into it, and you cre-
        ate the final binary—all that building and compiling with no more than
        a couple of keystrokes.
        Doing things completely manually would be error-prone and time-con-
        suming, and people would defer doing that as much as possible. These
        problems are alleviated by tooling. In the same way, unit-testing frame-
        works help developers write tests more quickly with a set of known
        APIs, execute those tests automatically, and review the results of those
        tests easily.

2.1.1   What unit-testing frameworks offer
        Up to now, the tests you’ve done were limited:
        ❂   They were not structured.
            You had to reinvent the wheel every time you wanted to test a fea-
            ture. One test might look like a console application, another uses a UI
            form, and another uses a web form. You don’t have that time to spend
            on testing, and the tests fail the “easy to implement” requirement.
        ❂   They were not repeatable.
            Neither you nor your team members could run the tests you’d writ-
            ten in the past. That breaks the “repeatedly” requirement and pre-



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                      Frameworks for unit testing     23




            vents you from finding regression bugs. With a framework, you can
            more easily and automatically write tests that are repeatable.
        ❂   They were not on all your code.
            The tests didn’t test all the code that matters. That means all the code
            with logic in it, because each and every one of those could contain a
            potential bug. (Property getters and setters don’t count as logic,
            unless you have some sort of logic inside them.) If it were easier to
            write the tests, you’d be more inclined to write more of them, and get
            better coverage.
        In short, what you’ve been missing is a framework for writing, running,
        and reviewing unit tests and their results. Figure 2.1 shows the areas in
        software development where a unit-testing framework has influence.




Figure 2.1 Unit tests are written as code, using libraries from the unit-testing frame-
work. Then the tests are run from a separate unit-testing tool, and the results are
reviewed (either in the UI or as text) by the developer or an automated build process.




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
24       CHAPTER 2         A first unit test




         Table 2.1 How unit-testing frameworks help developers write and execute
                   tests, and review results

              Unit-testing practice                            How the framework helps


 Write tests easily and in a structured manner.   Framework supplies the developer with a class library
                                                  that holds
                                                  • base classes or interfaces to inherit.
                                                  • attributes to place in your code to note your tests
                                                    to run.
                                                  • assert classes that have special assert methods
                                                    you invoke to verify your code.


 Execute one or all of the unit tests.            Framework provides a test runner (a console or
                                                  GUI tool) that
                                                  • identifies tests in your code.
                                                  • runs tests automatically.
                                                  • indicates status while running.
                                                  • can be automated by command line.

 Review the results of the test runs.             The test-runners will usually provide information
                                                  such as
                                                  • how many tests ran.
                                                  • how many tests didn’t run.
                                                  • how many tests failed.
                                                  • which tests failed.
                                                  • the reason tests failed.
                                                  • the ASSERT message you wrote.
                                                  • the code location that failed.
                                                  • possibly a full stack trace of any exceptions that
                                                    caused the test to fail, and will let you go to the var-
                                                    ious method calls inside the call stack.



         Unit-testing frameworks are code libraries and modules that help
         developers unit-test their code, as outlined in table 2.1. They also have
         another side—running the tests as part of an automated build, which I
         cover in later chapters.
         At the time of this writing, there are more than 150 unit-testing frame-
         works out there—practically one for every programming language in
         public use. A good list can be found at http://www.xprogramming.com.
         Consider that .NET, alone, has at least 9 different unit-testing frame-
         works; among these, NUnit is the de facto standard.



                  Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                      Introducing the LogAn project    25




        NOTE      Using a unit-testing framework doesn’t ensure that the tests we
                  write are readable, maintainable, or trustworthy, or that they cover all
                  the logic we’d like to test. We’ll look at how to ensure that our unit
                  tests have these properties in chapter 7 and in various other places
                  throughout this book.

2.1.2   The xUnit frameworks

        Collectively, these unit-testing frameworks are called the xUnit frame-
        works, because their names usually start with the first letters of the lan-
        guage for which they were built. You might have CppUnit for C++,
        JUnit for Java, NUnit for .NET, and HUnit for the Haskell program-
        ming language. Not all of them follow these naming guidelines, but
        most of them do.
        In this book, we’ll be using NUnit, a .NET unit-testing framework that
        makes it easy to write tests, run them, and get the results. NUnit
        started out as a direct port of the ubiquitous JUnit for Java, and has
        since made tremendous strides in its design and usability, setting it
        apart from its parent and breathing new life into an ecosystem of test
        frameworks that’s changing more and more. The concepts we’ll be
        looking at will be understandable to Java and C++ developers alike.

 2.2 Introducing the LogAn project
        The project that we’ll use for testing in this book will be simple at first,
        and will only contain one class. As the book moves along, we’ll extend
        that project with new classes and features. We’ll call it the LogAn proj-
        ect (short for “log and notification”).
        Here’s the scenario. Your company has many internal products it uses
        to monitor its applications at customer sites. All these products write
        log files and place them in a special directory. The log files are written
        in a proprietary format that your company has come up with that can’t
        be parsed by any existing third-party tools. You’re tasked with build-
        ing a product, LogAn, that can analyze these log files and find various
        special cases and events in them. When it finds these cases and events,
        it should alert the appropriate parties.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
26      CHAPTER 2      A first unit test




        In this book, we’ll write tests that verify LogAn’s parsing, event-recog-
        nition, and notification abilities. Before we get started testing our proj-
        ect, though, we’ll look at how to write a unit test with NUnit. The first
        step is installing it.

 2.3 First steps with NUnit
        As with any new tool, you’ll need to install it first. Because NUnit is
        open source and freely downloadable, this task should be rather sim-
        ple. Then we’ll see how to start writing a test with NUnit, use the vari-
        ous built-in attributes that NUnit ships with, and run our test and get
        some real results.

2.3.1   Installing NUnit
        You can download NUnit from www.NUnit.org or www.NUnit.com.
        NUnit is free to use and is an open source product, so you can get the
        source code for NUnit, compile it yourself, and use the source freely
        within the limits of the open source license. (See the license.txt file in
        the program directory for license details.)

        NOTE        At the time of writing, the latest version of NUnit is 2.2.8. The exam-
                    ples in this book should be compatible with most future versions of
                    the framework.

        To install NUnit, run the setup program you downloaded. The installer
        will place a shortcut to the GUI part of the NUnit runner on your
        desktop, but the main program files should reside in a directory named
        something like c:\Program Files\NUnit-Net-2.0 2.2.8. If you double-
        click the NUnit desktop icon, you’ll see the unit test runner shown in
        figure 2.2.
        We’ll be using this GUI to run our tests shortly.

2.3.2   Loading up the solution
        If you have the book’s code on your machine, load up the ArtOfUnit-
        Testing.sln solution from the Code folder inside Visual Studio 2008.




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                           First steps with NUnit       27




Figure 2.2 The NUnit GUI is divided into three main parts: the tree listing the tests
on the left, messages and errors at the top right, and stack trace information at the
bottom right.


        NOTE       The C# Express Edition of Visual Studio 2008 (or above) is fine for
                   use with this book.
        We’ll begin by testing the following simple class with one method (the
        unit we’re testing) inside it:

        public class LogAnalyzer
        {
            public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
            {
                if(!fileName.EndsWith(".SLF"))
                {
                    return false;
                }




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
28         CHAPTER 2       A first unit test




                      return true;
                }
           }


           This method may not seem complicated, but we’ll test it to make sure it
           works. In the real world, you’ll want to test any method that contains
           logic, even if it seems to be simple. Logic can fail, and we want to know
           when it does. In the following chapters, we’ll test more complicated
           scenarios and logic.
           The method looks at the file extension to determine whether a file is a
           valid log file or not. Our first test will be to send in a valid filename,
           and make sure the method returns true.
           Here are the first steps for writing an automated test for the IsValid-
           LogFileName method:

               1     Add a new class library project to the solution, which will con-
                     tain your test classes.
               2     To that library, add a new class that will hold your test methods.
               3     Add a new method to the preceding test case named IsValid-
                     LogFileName.

           We’ll touch more on test-naming and arrangement standards later in
           the book, but the basic rules are listed in table 2.2.

           Table 2.2 Basic rules for placing and naming tests

     Object to be tested                         Object to create on the testing side


 Project                      Create a test project named [ProjectUnderTest].Tests.


 Class                        For each class, create at least one class with the name [ClassName]Tests.


 Method                       For each method, create at least one test method with the following name:
                              [MethodName]_[StateUnderTest]_[ExpectedBehavior].




                    Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                        First steps with NUnit   29




        For example, the name for our LogAn test project would be
        AOUT.Logan.Tests (with AOUT standing for Art of Unit Testing).
        The name for the LogAnalyzer test class would be LogAnalyzerTests.
        Here are the three parts of the test method name:
        ❂   MethodName—The name of the method you’re testing
        ❂   StateUnderTest—The     conditions used to produce the expected
            behavior
        ❂   ExpectedBehavior—What you expect the tested method to do under
          the specified conditions
        In our test of the IsValidLogFileName method, the state or condition is
        that we’re sending the method a valid filename, and the expected
        behavior is that the method will return a true value. Our test method
        name might be IsValidFileName_validFile_ReturnsTrue().
        We haven’t used the NUnit test framework yet, but we’re close. We
        still need to add a reference to the project under test for the new testing
        project. Do this by right-clicking on the test project and selecting Add
        Reference. Then select the Projects tab and select the LogAn project.
        The next thing to learn is how to mark the test method to be loaded and
        run by NUnit automatically.

2.3.3   Using the NUnit attributes in your code
        NUnit uses an attribute scheme to recognize and load tests. Just like
        bookmarks in a book, these attributes help the framework identify the
        important parts in the assembly that it loads, and which parts are tests
        that need to be invoked.
        NUnit provides an assembly that contains these special attributes. You
        just need to add a reference in your test project (not in your production
        code!) to the NUnit.Framework assembly. You can find it under the
        .NET tab in the Add Reference dialog box. Type Nunit and you’ll see
        several assemblies starting with that name; add nunit.framework.
        NUnit needs at least two attributes to know what to run:




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
30   CHAPTER 2        A first unit test




     ❂    [TestFixture] —The [TestFixture] attribute denotes a class that
       holds automated NUnit tests. (If you replace the word “Fixture”
       with “Class”, it makes much more sense.) Put this attribute on your
       new LogAnalyzerTests class.
     ❂ [Test] —The [Test] attribute can be put on a method to denote it as

       an automated test to be invoked. Put this attribute on your new test
       method.
     When you’re done, your test code should look like this:

     [TestFixture]
      public class LogAnalyzerTests
      {
         [Test]
          public void IsValidFileName_validFile_ReturnsTrue()
          {

            }
      }



     TIP        NUnit requires test methods to be void and accept no parameters.

     At this point, you’ve marked your class and a method to be run. Now,
     whatever code you put inside your test method will be invoked by
     NUnit whenever you want.

 2.4 Writing our first test
     How do we test our code? A unit test usually comprises three main
     actions:
     ❂    Arrange objects, creating and setting them up as necessary.
     ❂    Act on an object.
     ❂    Assert that something is as expected.

     Here’s a simple piece of code that does all three, with the assert part
     performed by the NUnit framework’s Assert class:



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                        Writing our first test   31




        [Test]
         public void IsValidFileName_validFile_ReturnsTrue()
         {
             //arrange
             LogAnalyzer analyzer = new LogAnalyzer();

             //act
             bool result = analyzer.IsValidLogFileName("whatever.slf");

             //assert
             Assert.IsTrue(result, "filename should be valid!");
         }


        Before we go on, you’ll need to know a little more about the Assert
        class, because it’s an important part of writing unit tests.

2.4.1   The Assert class

        The Assert class has static methods and is located in the NUnit.Frame-
        work namespace. It’s the bridge between your code and the NUnit
        framework, and its purpose is to declare that a specific assumption is
        supposed to exist. If the arguments that are passed into the Assert class
        turn out to be different than what we’re asserting, NUnit will realize
        the test has failed and will alert us. We can optionally tell the Assert
        class what message to alert us with if the assertion fails.
        The Assert class has many methods, with the main one being
        Assert.IsTrue (some Boolean expression), which verifies a Boolean
        condition. But there are many other methods.
        This one verifies that an expected object or value is the same as the
        actual one:
        Assert.AreEqual(expectedObject, actualObject, message);

        Here’s an example:
        Assert.AreEqual(2, 1+1, "Math is broken");

        This one verifies that the two arguments reference the same object:
        Assert.AreSame(expectedObject, actualObject, message);




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
32      CHAPTER 2    A first unit test




        Here’s an example:
        Assert.AreSame(int.Parse("1"),int.Parse("1"),
          "this test should fail").

        Assert is simple to learn, use, and remember.

        Now that we’ve covered the basics of the API, let’s run a test

2.4.2   Running our first test with NUnit
        It’s time to run our first test and see if it passes or not. To do that, we
        need to have a build assembly (a .dll file in this case) that we can give
        to NUnit to inspect. After you build the project, locate the path to the
        assembly file that was built.
        Then, load up the NUnit GUI and select File > Open. Enter the name
        of your test’s assembly. You’ll see your single test and the class and
        namespace hierarchy of your project on the left, as shown in figure 2.3.
        Click the Run button to run your tests. The tests are automatically
        grouped by namespace (assembly, typename) so you can pick and
        choose to run only by specific types or namespaces. (You’ll usually
        want to run all of the tests to get better feedback on failures.)
        As you can see, we have a failing test, which might suggest that there’s
        a bug in the code. It’s time to fix the code and see the test pass.




Figure 2.3 NUnit test failures are shown in three places: the test hierarchy on the left
becomes red, the progress bar at the top becomes red, and any errors are shown on
the right.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         Writing our first test   33




2.4.3   Fixing our code and passing the test
        A quick look through the code reveals that we’re testing for an upper-
        case filename extension, and our test is sending in a lowercase filename
        extension, which makes our code return false instead of true. Our test
        could also have failed if our code threw an exception of any kind. An
        unhandled exception in your code is considered a failure, unless your
        code is supposed to throw an exception under specific circumstances.
        (We’ll see how to test for deliberate exceptions in section 2.5.2.)
        If we fix the if statement in the production code to look like this, we
        can make the test pass:
        if(!fileName.ToLower().EndsWith(".slf"))

        But this is a sign that the name of our test may need changing, and that
        we need another test to make sure that sending in an uppercase exten-
        sion works. (We know that it works now, but who’s to say that some
        programmer working on this feature won’t break it in the future?) A
        better name for our current test might be
        IsValidFileName_validFileLowerCased_ReturnsTrue().

        If you rebuild the solution now, you’ll find that NUnit’s GUI can
        detect that the assembly has changed, and it will automatically reload
        the assembly in the GUI. If you rerun the tests, you’ll see that the test
        passes with flying (green) colors.

2.4.4   From red to green
        NUnit’s GUI is built with a simple idea in mind: all the tests should
        pass in order to get the “green” light to go ahead. If even one of the
        tests fails, you’ll see a red light on the top progress bar to let you know
        that something isn’t right with the system (or your tests).
        The red-green concept is prevalent throughout the unit-testing world,
        and especially in test-driven development (TDD). Its mantra is “Red-
        Green-Refactor,” meaning that you start with a failing test, then pass it,
        and then make your code readable and more maintainable.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
34      CHAPTER 2   A first unit test




 2.5 More NUnit attributes
        Now that you’ve seen how easy it is to create unit tests that run auto-
        matically, we’ll look at how to set up the initial state for each test, and
        how to remove any garbage that’s left by your test.
        A unit test has specific points in its lifecycle that you’ll want to have
        control over. Running the test is only one of them, and there are special
        setup methods that run before each test run, as we’ll see in the next sec-
        tion.

2.5.1   Setup and teardown
        For unit tests, it’s important that any leftover data or instances from
        previous tests are destroyed and that the state for the new test is recre-
        ated as if no tests have been run before. If you have leftover state from
        a previous test, you might find that your test fails, but only if it’s run
        after a different test, and it passes other times. Locating that kind of
        dependency bug between tests is difficult and time-consuming, and I
        don’t recommend it to anyone. Having tests that are totally indepen-
        dent of each other is one of the best practices I will be covering in part
        2 of this book.
                               In NUnit, there are special attributes that allow
                               easier control of setting up and clearing out state
                               before and after tests. These are the [SetUp] and
                               [TearDown] action attributes. Figure 2.4 shows the
                               process of running a test with setup and teardown
                               actions.
                               For now, make sure that each test you write uses a
                               new instance of the class under test, so that no
                               leftover state will mess up your tests.




                               Figure 2.4 NUnit performs setup and teardown actions
                               before each and every test method.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                 More NUnit attributes   35




We can take control of what happens in the setup and teardown steps
by using two NUnit attributes:
❂   [SetUp]—This attribute can be put on a method, just like a [Test]
  attribute, and it causes NUnit to run that setup method each time it
  runs any of the tests in your class.
❂ [TearDown]—This attribute denotes a method to be executed once

  after each test in your class has executed.
Listing 2.1 shows how we can use the [SetUp] and [TearDown] attri-
butes to make sure that each test receives a new instance of LogAna-
lyzer, while also saving some repetitive typing.

Listing 2.1 Using [SetUp] and [TearDown] attributes

using NUnit.Framework;

namespace AOUT.LogAn.Tests
{
   [TestFixture]
    public class LogAnalyzerTests
    {
        private LogAnalyzer m_analyzer=null;

         [SetUp]
         public void Setup()
         {
             m_analyzer = new LogAnalyzer();
         }

          [Test]
           public void IsValidFileName_validFileLowerCased_ReturnsTrue()
           {
               bool result =
    m_analyzer.IsValidLogFileName("whatever.slf");

               Assert.IsTrue(result, "filename should be valid!");
           }

    [Test]
     public void IsValidFileName_validFileUpperCased_ReturnsTrue()
     {




       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
36      CHAPTER 2     A first unit test




                      bool result =
            m_analyzer.IsValidLogFileName("whatever.SLF");

                      Assert.IsTrue(result, "filename should be valid!");
                  }

                  [TearDown]
                   public void TearDown()
                   {
                      m_analyzer = null;
                   }
              }
        }


        You can think of the setup and teardown methods as constructors and
        destructors for the tests in your class. You can only have one of each in
        any test class, and each one will be performed once for each test in your
        class. In listing 2.1 we have two unit tests, so the execution path for
        NUnit will be something like that shown in figure 2.5.
        NUnit contains several other attributes to help with setup and cleanup
        of state. For example, [TestFixtureSetUp]and [TestFixtureTearDown]
        allow setting up state once before all the tests in a specific class run, and
        once after all the tests have been run (once per test fixture). This is use-
        ful when setting up or cleaning up takes a long time, and you want to
        only do it once per fixture. You’ll need to be cautious about using these
        attributes. You may find that you’re sharing state between tests if
        you’re not careful.
        Next, we’ll look at how we can test that an exception is thrown by our
        code when it should be.

2.5.2   Checking for expected exceptions
        One common testing scenario is making sure that the correct exception
        is thrown from the tested method when it should be.
        Let’s assume that our method should throw an ArgumentException
        when we send in an empty filename. If our code doesn’t throw an
        exception, it means our test should fail. We’re going to test the method
        logic in listing 2.2.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                             More NUnit attributes   37




Figure 2.5 How NUnit calls SetUp and TearDown with multiple unit tests in the same
class: each test is preceded by running SetUp and followed by a TearDown method run.


       Listing 2.2 The LogAnalyzer filename-validation logic we’d like to test

       public class LogAnalyzer
           {
               public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
               {
                   if(String.IsNullOrEmpty(fileName))
                   {
                       throw new ArgumentException("No filename provided!");
                   }
                   if(!fileName.EndsWith(".SLF"))
                   {




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
38      CHAPTER 2     A first unit test




                          return false;
                      }
                      return true;
                  }
            }


        There’s a special attribute in NUnit that helps us test exceptions: the
        [ExpectedException] attribute. Here’s what a test that checks for the
        appearance of an exception might look like:

        [Test]
        [ExpectedException(typeof(ArgumentException),
         ExpectedMessage ="No filename provided!")]
               public void IsValidFileName_EmptyFileName_ThrowsException()
               {
                   m_analyzer.IsValidLogFileName(string.Empty);
               }


        There are several important things to note here:
        ❂ The expected exception message is provided as a parameter to the
          [ExpectedException] attribute.
        ❂ There’s no Assert call in the test itself. The [ExpectedException]

          attribute contains the assert within it.
        ❂ There’s no point getting the value of the Boolean result from the

          method because the method call is supposed to trigger an exception.
        Given the method in listing 2.2 and the test for it, this test should pass.
        Had our method not thrown an ArgumentException, or had the excep-
        tion’s message been different than the one expected, our test would
        have failed—saying either that an exception was not thrown or that the
        message was different than expected.

2.5.3   Ignoring tests
        Sometimes you’ll have tests that are broken and you still need to check
        in your code to the main source tree. In those rare cases (and they
        should be rare!), you can put an [Ignore] attribute on tests that are
        broken because of a problem in the test, not in the code.



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                          More NUnit attributes       39




Figure 2.6 In NUnit, an ignored test is marked in yellow (the middle test), and the
reason for not running the test is listed under the Tests Not Run tab on the right.

        It can look like this:

        [Test]
        [Ignore("there is a problem with this test")]
         public void IsValidFileName_ValidFile_ReturnsTrue()
         {
         /// ...
         }


        Running this test in the NUnit GUI will produce a result like that
        shown in figure 2.6.
        What happens when you want to have tests running not by a
        namespace but by some other type of grouping? That’s where test cate-
        gories come in.

2.5.4   Setting test categories
        You can set up your tests to run under specific test categories, such as
        slow tests and fast tests. You do this by using NUnit’s [Category] attri-
        bute:

        [Test]
        [Category("Fast Tests")]
         public void IsValidFileName_ValidFile_ReturnsTrue()
         {
         /// ...
         }




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
40      CHAPTER 2    A first unit test




Figure 2.7 You can set up categories of tests in the code base and then choose a par-
ticular category to be run from the NUnit GUI.

        When you load your test assembly again in NUnit, you can see them
        organized by categories instead of namespaces. Switch to the Catego-
        ries tab in NUnit, and double-click the category you’d like to run so
        that it moves into the lower Selected Categories pane. Then click the
        Run button. Figure 2.7 shows what the screen might look like after you
        select the Categories tab.
        So far, we’ve run simple tests against methods that return some value
        as a result. What if our method doesn’t return a value, but changes
        some state in the object?

 2.6 Indirect testing of state
        Throughout this chapter and the next, we’ll be using state-based test-
        ing methods in our unit tests.
DEFINITION     State-based testing (also called state verification) determines whether the
               exercised method worked correctly by examining the state of the sys-
               tem under test and its collaborators (dependencies) after the method is
               exercised.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                  Indirect testing of state      41




Let’s consider a simple state-based testing example using the LogAna-
lyzer class, which we can’t test simply by calling one method in our
test. Listing 2.3 shows the code for this class.

Listing 2.3 Testing the property value by calling IsValidLogFileName

public class LogAnalyzer
    {
        private bool wasLastFileNameValid;

          public bool WasLastFileNameValid
          {
              get { return wasLastFileNameValid; }
              set { wasLastFileNameValid = value; }
          }

          public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
          {
              if (!fileName.ToLower().EndsWith(".slf"))
              {
                  wasLastFileNameValid=false;
                  return false;
              }
                                                         Saves state of result
              wasLastFileNameValid = true;               for later assertions
              return true;
          }
    }


As you can see in this code, LogAnalyzer remembers what the last out-
come of a validation check was. Because the logic depends on having
another method invoked first, we can’t simply test this functionality by
writing a test that gets a return value from a method; we have to use
alternative means to see if the logic works.
First, we have to identify where the logic we’re testing is located. Is it
in the new property called wasLastFileNameValid? Not really; it’s in the
IsValidLogFileName method, so our test should start with the name of
that method. Listing 2.4 shows a simple test to see if the outcome is
remembered.



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
42   CHAPTER 2     A first unit test




     Listing 2.4 Testing a class by calling a method and checking the value of a property

     [Test]
      public void IsValidLogFileName_ValidName_RemembersTrue()
      {
         LogAnalyzer3 log = new LogAnalyzer3();                Asserts on
         log.IsValidLogFileName("somefile.slf");               property value,
         Assert.IsTrue(log.WasLastFileNameValid);              not return value
      }


     Notice that we’re testing the functionality of the IsValidLogFileName
     method by asserting against code in a different location than the piece
     of code under test.
     Listing 2.5 shows another example (that will be used again in chapter
     3). This one looks into the functionality of a built-in memory calcula-
     tor. (Take a look at Calculator.cs under CH3 and CalculatorTests.cs in
     the book’s sample code.)
     Listing 2.5 The Add()and Sum() methods

     public class Calculator
         {
             private int sum=0;

               public void Add(int number)
               {
                sum+=number;
               }

               public int Sum()
               {
                   int temp = sum;
                   sum = 0;
                   return temp;
               }
         }


     The Calculator class works a lot like the pocket calculator you know
     and love. You can click a number, then click Add, then click another
     number, then click Add again, and so on. When you’re done, you can
     click Equals and you’ll get the total so far.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                   Indirect testing of state   43




Where do you start testing the Sum() function? You should always con-
sider the simplest test to begin with, such as testing that Sum() returns 0
by default. This is shown in listing 2.6.

Listing 2.6 The simplest test for Calculator’s Sum()

[Test]
 public void Sum_NoAddCalls_DefaultsToZero()
 {
       Calculator calc = new Calculator();
       int lastSum = calc.Sum();                          Asserts on default
       Assert.AreEqual(0,lastSum);                        return value
 }


We can’t write any other test without first invoking the Add() method,
so our next test will have to call Add() and assert against the number
returned from Sum(). Listing 2.7 shows our test class with this new test.

Listing 2.7 The two tests, with the second one calling the Add() method

[SetUp]
          public void Setup()
          {
             calc = new Calculator();
          }

        [Test]
         public void Sum_NoAddCalls_DefaultsToZero()
         {
             int lastSum = calc.Sum();
             Assert.AreEqual(0,lastSum);
         }

        [Test]
         public void Add_CalledOnce_SavesNumberForSum()
         {
            calc.Add(1);                         Tests the Add() method
            int lastSum = calc.Sum();            indirectly by checking return
            Assert.AreEqual(1,lastSum);          value from Sum()
         }




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
44   CHAPTER 2     A first unit test




     Notice that this time the tests initialize the Calculator object in a
     [SetUp]-related method. This is a good idea, because it saves time writ-
     ing the tests, makes the code smaller, and makes sure Calculator is
     always initialized the same way. It’s also better for test maintainability,
     because if the constructor for Calculator changes, you only need to
     change the initialization in one place instead of going through each test
     and changing the new call.
     So far, so good. But what happens when the method we’re testing
     depends on an external resource, such as the filesystem, a database, a
     web service, or anything else that’s hard for us to control? That’s when
     we start creating test stubs, fake objects, and mock objects, which are
     discussed in the next few chapters.

 2.7 Summary
     In this chapter, we looked at using NUnit to write simple tests against
     simple code. We used the [SetUp] and [TearDown] attributes to make
     sure our tests always use new and untouched state. We used [Ignore]
     to skip tests that need to be fixed. Test categories can help us group
     tests in a logical way rather than by class and namespace, and [Expect-
     edException] helps us make sure our code throws exceptions when it
     should. Finally, we looked at what happens when we aren’t facing a
     simple method with a return value, and we need to test the end state of
     an object. This attribute is handy, and you’ll use it in many of your
     future tests.
     This isn’t enough though. Most test code has to deal with far more dif-
     ficult coding issues. The next couple of chapters will give you some
     more basic tools for writing unit tests. You’ll need to pick and choose
     from these tools when you write tests for various difficult scenarios
     you’ll come across.
     Finally, keep the following points in mind:
     ❂   It’s common practice to have one test class per tested class, one test
         project per tested project, and at least one test method per tested
         method.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                           Summary        45




❂  Name your tests clearly using the following model: [Metho-
   dUnderTest]_[Scenario]_[ExpectedBehavior].
❂ Use the [SetUp] and [TearDown] attributes to reuse code in your

   tests, such as code for creating and initializing objects all your tests
   use.
❂ Don’t use [SetUp] and [TearDown] to initialize or destroy objects that

   aren’t shared throughout the test class in all the tests, because it makes
   the tests less understandable. Someone reading your code won’t
   know which tests use the logic inside the setup method and which
   don’t.
In the next chapter, we’ll look at more real-world scenarios, where the
code to be tested is a little more realistic than what you’ve seen so far.
It has dependencies and testability problems, and we’ll start discussing
the notion of integration tests versus unit tests, and what that means to
us as developers who write tests and want to ensure our code’s quality.




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
46   CHAPTER 2   A first unit test




           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                           Part 2

                              Core techniques

aving covered the basics in previous chapters, we’ll now introduce the

H
core testing and refactoring techniques that are necessary for writing
tests in the real world.
In chapter 3, we’ll begin by learning about stubs and how they help us
break dependencies. We’ll go over refactoring techniques that make
code more testable, and we’ll learn about seams in the process.
Then, in chapter 4, we’ll move on to mock objects and interaction test-
ing and look at how mock objects differ from stubs.
Lastly, in chapter 5, we’ll look at isolation frameworks (also known as
mock object frameworks) and how they solve some of the repetitive
coding involved in handwritten mocks and stubs. Chapter 5 also com-
pares the leading isolation frameworks in .NET and uses Rhino Mocks
for examples, showing its API in common use cases.




     Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
3

Using stubs to break
dependencies
     This chapter covers
            • Defining stubs
            • Refactoring code to use stubs
            • Overcoming encapsulation problems in code
            • Exploring best practices when using stubs



     n the previous chapter, we wrote our first unit test using NUnit and

 I   explored the different testing attributes that are available, such as
     [ExpectedException], [SetUp], and [TearDown]. We also built tests for
     simple use cases, where all we had to check on were simple return values
     from simple objects.
     In this chapter, we’ll take a look at more realistic examples where the
     object under test relies on another object over which we have no control
     (or which doesn’t work yet). That object could be a web service, the time
     of day, threading, or many other things. The important point is that our
     test can’t control what that dependency returns to our code under test or
     how it behaves (if we wanted to simulate an exception, for example).
     That’s when we use stubs.




                                        49



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
50    CHAPTER 3    Using stubs to break dependencies




 3.1 Introducing stubs
      Flying people into space presents interesting challenges to engineers
      and astronauts, one of the more difficult being how to make sure the
      astronaut is ready to go into space and operate all the machinery. A full
      integration test for a space shuttle would require being in space, and that’s
      obviously not a safe way to test astronauts. That’s why NASA has full
      simulators that mimic the surroundings of a space shuttle’s control deck,
      which removes the external dependency of having to be in outer space.

DEFINITION   An external dependency is an object in your system that your code under
             test interacts with, and over which you have no control. (Common
             examples are filesystems, threads, memory, time, and so on.)
      Controlling external dependencies in your code is the topic that this
      chapter, and most of this book, will be dealing with. In programming,
      we use stubs to get around the problem of external dependencies.

DEFINITION   A stub is a controllable replacement for an existing dependency (or col-
             laborator) in the system. By using a stub, you can test your code with-
             out dealing with the dependency directly.

      Let’s look at a real example and make things a bit more complicated for
      our LogAnalyzer class, introduced in the previous chapters. We’ll try to
      untangle a dependency against the filesystem.

        Test pattern names
        xUnit Test Patterns by Gerard Meszaros is a classic pattern reference book
        for unit testing. It defines patterns for things we fake in our tests in at
        least five ways, which I feel confuses people (although it’s detailed). In
        this book, I chose to use only three definitions for fake things in tests:
        fakes, stubs, and mocks. I feel that this simplification of terms makes it
        easy for readers to digest the patterns, and that there’s no need to know
        more than those three to get started and write great tests. In various
        places in the book, though, I will refer to the pattern names used in xUnit
        Test Patterns so that you can easily refer to that definition if you’d like.




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                    Identifying a filesystem dependency in LogAn   51




3.2 Identifying a filesystem dependency in LogAn
    Our LogAnalyzer class application can be configured to handle multiple
    log filename extensions using a special adapter for each file. For the
    sake of simplicity, let’s assume that the allowed filenames are stored
    somewhere on disk as a configuration setting for the application, and
    that the IsValidLogFileName method looks like this:

    public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
            {
            //read through the configuration file
            //return true if configuration says extension is supported.
            }


    The problem that arises, as depicted in figure 3.1, is that, once this test
    depends on the filesystem, we’re performing an integration test, and we
    have all the associated problems: integration tests are slower to run,
    they need configuration, they test multiple things, and so on.
                        This is the essence of test-inhibiting design: the code
                        has some dependency on an external resource,
                        which might break the test even though the code’s
                        logic is perfectly valid. In legacy systems, a single
                        class or method might have many dependencies on
                        external resources over which your test code has lit-
                        tle, if any, control. Chapter 9 touches more on this
                        subject.




                        Figure 3.1 Our method has a direct dependency on the
                        filesystem. Our design of the object model under test
                        inhibits us from testing it as a unit test; it promotes
                        integration testing.




          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
52   CHAPTER 3     Using stubs to break dependencies




 3.3 Determining how to easily test LogAnalyzer
     “There is no object-oriented problem that cannot be solved by adding a
     layer of indirection, except, of course, too many layers of indirection.” I
     like this quote (from a friend of mine) because a lot of the “art” in the
     art of unit testing is about finding the right place to add or use a layer
     of indirection to test the code base.
     You can’t test something? Add a layer that wraps up the calls to that
     something, and then mimic that layer in your tests. Or make that some-
     thing replaceable (so that it is itself a layer of indirection). The art also
     involves figuring out when a layer of indirection already exists instead
     of having to invent it, or knowing when not to use it because it compli-
     cates things too much. But let’s take it one step at a time.
     The only way we can write a test for this code, as it is, is to have a con-
     figuration file in the filesystem. Because we’re trying to avoid these
     kinds of dependencies, we want our code to be easily testable without
     resorting to integration testing.
     If we look at the astronaut analogy we started out with, we can see that
     there’s a definite pattern for breaking the dependency:
     1   Find the interface or API that the object under test works against. In
         the astronaut example, this was the joysticks and monitors of the
         space shuttle, as depicted in figure 3.2.
     2   Replace the underlying implementation of that interface with something
         that you have control over. This involved hooking up the various
         shuttle monitors, joysticks, and buttons to a control room where test
         engineers were able to control what the space shuttle interface was
         showing to the astronauts under test.
     Transferring this pattern to our code requires more steps:
     1   Find the interface that the method under test works against. (In this
         case, “interface” isn’t used in the pure object-oriented sense; it refers to
         the defined method or class being collaborated with.) In our LogAn
         project, this is the filesystem configuration file.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                         Determining how to easily test LogAnalyzer   53




Figure 3.2 A space shuttle simulator has realistic joysticks and screens to simulate
the outside world. (Photo courtesy of NASA)

       2   If the interface is directly connected to our method under test (as in this
           case—we’re calling directly into the filesystem), make the code test-
           able by adding a level of indirection to the interface. In our example,
           moving the direct call to the filesystem to a separate class (such as
           FileExtensionManager) would be one way to add a level of indirec-
           tion. We’ll also look at others. (Figure 3.3 shows how the design
           might look after this step.)
       3 Replace the underlying implementation of that interactive interface with
           something that you have control over. In our case, we’ll replace the
           instance of the class that our method calls (FileExtensionManager)
           with a stub class that we can control (StubExtensionManager), giving
           our test code control over external dependencies.
       Our replacement instance will not talk to the filesystem at all, which
       breaks the dependency on the filesystem. Because we aren’t testing the
       class that talks to the filesystem, but the code that calls this class, it’s OK
       if that stub class doesn’t do anything but make happy noises when run-
       ning inside the test. Figure 3.4 shows the design after this alteration.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
54     CHAPTER 3    Using stubs to break dependencies




                                                        Figure 3.3 Introducing a layer
                                                        of indirection to avoid a direct
                                                        dependency on the filesys-
                                                        tem. The code that calls the
                                                        filesystem is separated into a
                                                        FileExtensionManager class,
                                                        which will later be replaced
                                                        with a stub in our test.

       In figure 3.4, I’ve added a new interface into the mix. This new inter-
       face will allow the object model to abstract away the operations of what
       a FileExtensionManager class does, and will allow the test to create a
       stub that looks like a FileExtensionManager. You’ll see more on this
       method in the next section.




Figure 3.4 Introducing a stub to break the dependency



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                         Refactoring our design to be more testable   55




        We’ve looked at one way of introducing testability into our code
        base—by creating a new interface. Now let’s look at the idea of code
        refactoring and introducing seams into our code.


 3.4 Refactoring our design to be more testable
        I’m going to introduce two new terms that will be used throughout the
        book: refactoring and seams.

DEFINITION     Refactoring is the act of changing the code’s design without breaking
               existing functionality.

DEFINITION     Seams are places in your code where you can plug in different function-
               ality, such as stub classes. (See Michael Feathers’ book, Working Effec-
               tively with Legacy Code, for more about seams.)

        If we want to break the dependency between our code under test and
        the filesystem, we can use common design patterns, refactorings, and
        techniques, and introduce one or more seams into the code. We just
        need to make sure that the resulting code does exactly the same thing.
        Here are some techniques for breaking dependencies:
        ❂ Extract an interface to allow replacing underlying implementation.
        ❂ Inject stub implementation into a class under test.

        ❂ Receive an interface at the constructor level.

        ❂ Receive an interface as a property get or set.

        ❂ Get a stub just before a method call.


        We’ll look at each of these.

3.4.1   Extract an interface to allow replacing underlying implementation
        In this technique, we need to break out the code that touches the file-
        system into a separate class. That way we can easily distinguish it and
        later replace the call to that class from our tested function (as was
        shown in figure 3.3). Listing 3.1 shows the places where we need to
        change the code.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
56   CHAPTER 3      Using stubs to break dependencies




     Listing 3.1 Extracting a class that touches the filesystem, and calling it

     public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
     {
         FileExtensionManager mgr =
                  new FileExtensionManager();
         return mgr.IsValid(fileName);                                Uses the extracted class
     }

     class FileExtensionManager
         {
             public bool IsValid(string fileName)
             {                                                        Defines the
                                                                      extracted class
             //read some file here
             }
         }


     Next, we can tell our class under test that, instead of using the concrete
     FileExtensionManager class, it will deal with some form of Extension-
     Manager, without knowing its concrete implementation. In .NET, this
     could be accomplished by either using a base class or an interface that
     FileExtensionManager would extend.

     Listing 3.2 shows the use of a new interface in our design to make it
     more testable. Figure 3.4 showed a diagram of this implementation.
     Listing 3.2 Extracting an interface from a known class

     public class FileExtensionManager : IExtensionManager                        Implements
         {                                                                        the interface
             public bool IsValid(string fileName)
             {
             ...
             }
         }
     public interface IExtensionManager
         {                                           Defines the
             bool IsValid (string fileName);         new interface
         }

     //the method under test:
     public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                    Refactoring our design to be more testable         57




         {                                                              Defines variable
              IExtensionManager mgr =                                   as the type of
                       new FileExtensionManager();                      the interface
              return mgr.IsValid(fileName);
         }


We’ve simply created an interface with one IsValid (string) method,
and made FileExtensionManager implement that interface. It still works
exactly the same way, only now we can replace the “real” manager with
our own “stub” manager to support our test.
We still haven’t created the stub extension manager, so let’s create that
right now. It’s shown in listing 3.3.

Listing 3.3 Simple stub code that always returns true

public class StubExtensionManager:IExtensionManager
    {                                            Implements
        public bool IsValid(string fileName)     IExtensionManager
        {
            return true;
        }
    }



This stub extension manager will always return true, no matter what
the file extension is. We can use it in our tests to make sure that no test
will ever have a dependency on the filesystem, but also so we can cre-
ate new and bizarre scenarios where we can simulate serious system
errors like making the stub manager throw an OutOfMemoryException
and seeing how the system deals with it. Later in this chapter, we’ll add
configurability to the stub class so it can emulate many things and be
used by multiple tests.
Now we have an interface and two classes implementing it, but our
method under test still calls the real implementation directly:

public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
        {
            IExtensionManager mgr = new FileExtensionManager();




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
58      CHAPTER 3    Using stubs to break dependencies




                    return mgr. IsValid (fileName);
                }


        We somehow have to tell our method to talk to our implementation
        rather than the original implementation of IExtensionManager. We need
        to introduce a seam into the code, where we can plug in our stub.

3.4.2   Inject stub implementation into a class under test
        There are several proven ways to create interface-based seams in our
        code—places where we can inject an implementation of an interface
        into a class to be used in its methods. Here are some of the most nota-
        ble ways:
        ❂ Receive an interface at the constructor level and save it in a field for
          later use.
        ❂ Receive an interface as a property get or set and save it in a field for

          later use.
        ❂ Receive an interface just before the call in the method under test

          using
          • a parameter to the method (parameter injection).
          • a factory class.
          • a local factory method.
          • variations on the preceding techniques.

        The parameter injection method is trivial: you send in an instance of a
        (fake) dependency to the method in question by adding a parameter to
        the method signature.
        Let’s go through the rest of the possible solutions one by one and see
        why you’d want to use each.

3.4.3   Receive an interface at the constructor level (constructor injection)
        In this scenario, we add a new constructor (or a new parameter to an
        existing constructor) that will accept an object of the interface type we
        extracted earlier (IExtensionManager). The constructor then sets a local
        field of the interface type in the class for later use by our method or any
        other. Figure 3.5 shows the flow of the stub injection.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                      Refactoring our design to be more testable   59




                                                Figure 3.5 Flow of injection via a
                                                constructor


Listing 3.4 shows how we could write a test for our LogAnalyzer class
using a constructor injection technique.
Listing 3.4 Injecting our stub using constructor injection

public class LogAnalyzer                Defines production code
    {
        private IExtensionManager manager;

           public LogAnalyzer ()
           {                                                 Creates object
               manager = new FileExtensionManager();         in production code
           }
           public LogAnalyzer(IExtensionManager mgr)
           {
               manager = mgr;                        Defines constructor
           }                                         that can be called by tests


           public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
           {
               return manager.IsValid(fileName);
           }
     }

public interface IExtensionManager
    {




         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
60   CHAPTER 3       Using stubs to break dependencies




                 bool IsValid(string fileName);
         }

        [TestFixture]                                Defines test code
         public class LogAnalyzerTests
         {
            [Test]
             public void
     IsValidFileName_NameShorterThan6CharsButSupportedExtension_ReturnsFalse()
             {
                  StubExtensionManager myFakeManager =
                              new StubExtensionManager();              Sets up stub
                  myFakeManager.ShouldExtensionBeValid                 to return true
                                                   = true;

                     //create analyzer and inject stub
                     LogAnalyzer log =
                         new LogAnalyzer (myFakeManager);                  Sends in stub

                     //Assert logic assuming extension is supported
                     bool result = log.IsValidLogFileName("short.ext");
                     Assert.IsFalse(result,
                           "File name with less than 5 chars should have failed
                           the method, even if the extension is supported");
                 }
         }

         internal class StubExtensionManager : IExtensionManager
         {
             public bool ShouldExtensionBeValid;                                Defines stub
                                                                                that uses
                 public bool IsValid(string fileName)                           simplest
                                                                                mechanism
                 {                                                              possible
                     return ShouldExtensionBeValid;
             }
         }


     NOTE        The stub analyzer is located in the same file as the test code because
                 currently the stub is used only from within this test class. It’s far eas-
                 ier to locate, read, and maintain a stub in the same file than in a dif-
                 ferent one. If, later on, I have an additional class that needs to use
                 this stub, I can move it to another file easily.




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                       Refactoring our design to be more testable   61




       Notice that the test in listing 3.4 tests some domain logic that’s built on
       top of the call to the FileExtensionManager. The domain logic in IsVal-
       idLogFileName should make sure that the extension is supported, and
       that the filename is long enough to be considered.
       You’ll also notice that the stub object in listing 3.4 can be configured by
       the test code as to what Boolean value to return when its method is
       called. Configuring the stub from the test means the stub class’s source
       code can be reused in more than one test case, with the test setting the
       values for the stub before using it on the object under test. This also
       helps the readability of the test code, because the reader of the code can
       read the test and find everything she needs to know in one place. Read-
       ability is an important aspect of writing unit tests, and we’ll cover it in
       detail later in the book, particularly in chapter 7.
       Another thing to note is that, by using parameters in the constructor,
       we’re in effect making the parameters non-optional dependencies
       (assuming this is the only constructor), which is a design choice. The
       user of the type will have to send in arguments for any specific depen-
       dencies that are needed.
Problems with constructor injection
       Problems can arise from using constructors to inject implementations.
       If your code under test requires more than one stub to work correctly
       without dependencies, adding more and more constructors (or more
       and more constructor parameters) becomes a hassle, and it can even
       make the code less readable and less maintainable.
       For example, suppose LogAnalyzer also had a dependency on a web
       service and a logging service in addition to the file extension manager.
       The constructor might look like this:

       public LogAnalyzer(IExtensionManager mgr, ILog logger, IWebService
          service)
        {
            //    this constructor can be called by tests
                   manager = mgr;
                log= logger;
                svc= service;
           }




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
62   CHAPTER 3    Using stubs to break dependencies




     One solution to these problems is to create a special class that contains
     all the values needed to initialize a class, and to have only one parame-
     ter to the method: that class type. That way, you only pass around one
     object with all the relevant dependencies. (This is also known as a
     parameter object refactoring.) This can get out of hand pretty quickly, with
     dozens of properties on an object; but it’s possible.
     Another possible solution to these problems is using inversion of con-
     trol (IoC) containers. You can think of IoC containers as “smart facto-
     ries” for your objects (although they are much more than that). A
     couple of well-known containers of this type are Spring.NET and Cas-
     tle Windsor. Both provide special factory methods that take in the type
     of object you’d like to create and any dependencies that it needs, and
     then initialize the object using special configurable rules such as what
     constructor to call, what properties to set in what order, and so on.
     They’re powerful when put to use on a complicated composite object
     hierarchy where creating an object requires creating and initializing
     objects several levels down the line. If your class needs an ILogger
     interface at its constructor, for example, you can configure such a con-
     tainer object to always return the same ILogger object that you give it,
     when resolving this interface requirement. The end result of using con-
     tainers is usually simpler handling and retrieving of objects, and less
     worry about the dependencies or maintaining the constructors.

     TIP   Some of the more popular containers in the .NET world are Castle
           Windsor, Microsoft Unity, and Spring.NET. There are also many up-
           and-coming container implementations, such as Autofac, Ninject, and
           StructureMap, which use a more fluent interface API, so look at them
           when you read more about this topic. Dealing with containers is
           beyond the scope of this book, but you can start reading about them
           with Scott Hanselman’s list: http://www.hanselman.com/blog/ListOf-
           NETDependencyInjectionContainersIOC.aspx.

     Now, imagine that you have 50 tests against your constructor, and you
     find another dependency you had not considered, such as a factory ser-
     vice for creating special objects that works against a database. You’d
     have to create an interface for that dependency and add it as a parame-
     ter to the current constructor, and you’d also have to change the call in



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                       Refactoring our design to be more testable   63




       50 other tests that initialize the code. At this point, your constructor
       could use a facelift. Whatever logic it does have is beginning to be hid-
       den by the many parameters. Fortunately, using property getters and
       setters can solve this problem easily, as we’ll see in section 3.4.4.
When you should use constructor injection
       My experience is that using constructor arguments to initialize objects
       can make your testing code more cumbersome unless you’re using
       helper frameworks such as IoC containers for object creation. Every
       time you add another dependency to the class under test, you have to
       create a new constructor that takes all the other arguments plus a new
       one, make sure it calls the other constructors correctly, and make sure
       other users of this class initialize it with the new constructor.
       On the other hand, using parameters in constructors is a great way to
       signify to the user of your API that these parameters are non-optional.
       They have to be sent in when creating the object.
       If you want these dependencies to be optional, refer to the next section.
       It discusses using property getters and setters, which is a much more
       relaxed way to define optional dependencies than, say, adding different
       constructors to the class for each dependency.
       There are people who disagree with my approach and define construc-
       tor arguments as non-optional arguments, using properties strictly for
       optional ones. That way, the semantics of the class also imply the
       proper usage of that class. I agree somewhat with this approach; my
       problem is with its maintainability.
       TIP   You’ll find that dilemmas about what method to use in which situation
             are common in the world of unit testing. This is a wonderful thing.
             Always question your assumptions; you might learn something new.
       If you choose to use constructor injection, you’ll probably also want to
       use IoC containers. This would be a great solution if all code in the
       world were using IoC containers, but most people don’t know what the
       Inversion of Control principle is, let alone what tools you can use to
       make it a reality. The future of unit testing will likely see more and
       more use of these frameworks. As that happens, we’ll see clearer and
       clearer guidelines on how to design classes that have dependencies, or



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
64      CHAPTER 3      Using stubs to break dependencies




        we’ll see tools that solve the dependency injection problem without
        needing to use constructors at all.
        In any case, constructor parameters are just one way to go. Properties
        are often used as well.

3.4.4   Receive an interface as a property get or set
        In this scenario, we add a property get and set for each dependency
        we’d like to inject. We then use this dependency when we need it in our
        code under test. Figure 3.6 shows the flow of injection with properties.




                                                           Figure 3.6 Using properties to
                                                           inject dependencies. This is
                                                           much simpler than using a
                                                           constructor because each test can
                                                           set only the properties that it
                                                           needs to get the test underway.

        Using this technique (also called dependency injection, a term that can also
        be used to describe the other techniques in this chapter), our test code
        would look quite similar to that in section 3.4.3, which used construc-
        tor injection. But this code, shown in listing 3.5, is more readable and
        simpler to achieve.
        Listing 3.5 Injecting a stub by adding property setters to the class under test

        public class LogAnalyzer
            {
                private IExtensionManager manager;

                 public LogAnalyzer ()




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Refactoring our design to be more testable        65




              {
           manager = new FileExtensionManager();
              }

                public IExtensionManager ExtensionManager
                {                                                        Allows setting
                    get { return manager; }                              dependency
                    set { manager = value; }                             via a property
                }

                public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
                {
                    return manager.IsValid(fileName);
                }
          }

             [Test]
              Public void
      IsValidFileName_NameShorterThan6CharsButSupportedExtension_ReturnsFalse()
              {
                   //set up the stub to use, make sure it returns true
                   ...

                     //create analyzer and inject stub
                     LogAnalyzer log =                              Injects stub
                         new LogAnalyzer ();
                    log.ExtensionManager=someFakeManagerCreatedEarlier;

                     //Assert logic assuming extension is supported
                     ...
                }
          }


      Like constructor injection, property injection has an effect on the API
      design in terms of defining which dependencies are required and which
      aren’t. By using properties, you’re effectively saying, “This dependency
      isn’t required to operate this type.”
When you should use property injection
      Use this technique when you want to signify that a dependency of the
      class under test is optional, or if the dependency has a default instance
      created that doesn’t create any problems during the test.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
66      CHAPTER 3     Using stubs to break dependencies




3.4.5   Getting a stub just before a method call
        This section deals with a scenario where you get an instance of an
        object just before you do any operations with it, instead of getting it via
        a constructor or a property. The difference is that the object initiating
        the stub request in this situation is the code under test; in previous sec-
        tions, the stub instance was set by code external to the code under test
        before the test started.
Use a factory class
        In this scenario, we go back to the basics, where a class initializes the
        manager in its constructor, but it gets the instance from a factory class.
        The Factory pattern is a design that allows another class to be respon-
        sible for creating objects.
        Our tests will configure the factory class (which, in this case, uses a
        static method to return an instance of an object that implements IEx-
        tensionManager) to return a stub instead of the real implementation.
        Figure 3.7 shows this.
        This is a clean design, and many object-oriented systems use factory
        classes to return instances of objects. But most systems don’t allow




Figure 3.7 A test configures the factory class to return a stub object. The class under
test uses the factory class to get that instance, which in production code would
return an object that isn’t a stub.




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                     Refactoring our design to be more testable        67




anyone outside the factory class to change the instance being returned,
in order to protect the encapsulated design of this class.
In this case, I’ve added a new setter method (our new seam) to the fac-
tory class so that our tests will have more control over what instance
gets returned. Once you introduce statics into test code, you might also
need to reset the factory state before or after each test run, so that
other tests won’t be affected by the configuration.
This technique produces test code that’s easy to read, and there’s a
clear separation of concerns between the classes. Each one is responsi-
ble for a different action.
Listing 3.6 shows code that uses the factory class in LogAnalyzer (and
also includes the tests).
Listing 3.6 Setting a factory class to return a stub when the test is running

public class LogAnalyzer
    {
        private IExtensionManager manager;
                                                                         Uses factory in
          public LogAnalyzer ()                                          production code
          {
              manager = ExtensionManagerFactory.Create();
          }

          public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
          {
              return manager.IsValid(fileName)
              && Path.GetFileNameWithoutExtension(fileName).Length>5;
          }
    }

        [Test]
         Public void
IsValidFileName_NameShorterThan6CharsButSupportedExtension_ReturnsFalse()
         {
              //set up the stub to use, make sure it returns true
              ...




        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
68   CHAPTER 3     Using stubs to break dependencies




                    ExtensionManagerFactory
                                       .SetManager(myFakeManager);
                   //create analyzer and inject stub
                   LogAnalyzer log =                               Sets stub into
                       new LogAnalyzer ();                         factory class
                                                                   for this test
                   //Assert logic assuming extension is supported
                   ...
               }
         }

     Class ExtensionManagerFactory
     {
         Private IExtensionManager customManager=null;
         Public IExtensionManager Create()
         {
             If(customManager!=null)
                                                   Defines factory that can use
     return customManager;
                                                   and return custom manager
             Return new FileExtensionManager();
         }
         Public void SetManager(IExtensionManager mgr)
         {
             customManager = mgr;
         }

     }


     The implementation of the factory class can vary greatly, and the
     examples shown here represent only the simplest illustration. For more
     examples of factories, read about the factory method and the Abstract
     Factory Design patterns in the classic book Design Patterns, by the Gang
     of Four (Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John M.
     Vlissides).
     The only thing you need to make sure of is that, once you use these pat-
     terns, you add a seam to the factories you make so that they can return
     your stubs instead of the default implementations. Many systems have
     a global #debug switch that, when turned on, causes seams to automati-
     cally send in fake or testable objects instead of default implementa-
     tions. Setting this up can be hard work, but it’s worth it when it’s time
     to test the system.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Refactoring our design to be more testable             69




Hiding seams in release mode
         What if you don’t want the seams to be visible in release mode? There
         are several ways to achieve that. In .NET, for example, you can put the
         seam statements (the added constructor, setter, or factory setter) under
         a conditional compilation argument, like this:

         #if DEBUG
             MyConstructor(IExtensionManager mgr)
             {...}
         #endif



         There’s also a special attribute in .NET that can be used for these pur-
         poses:

               [Conditional("DEBUG")]
               MyConstructor(IExtensionManager mgr)
               {...}


When you should use conditional compilation
         First, you need to realize that we’re dealing with a different layer depth
         here than the previous sections. At each different depth, we’re faking
         (or stubbing) a different object. Table 3.1 shows three layer depths that
         are used inside the code to return stubs.

         Table 3.1 Layers of code that can be faked

              Code under test                                         Possible action

 Layer depth 1:                                  Add a constructor argument that will be used as the
 the FileExtensionManager                        dependency. A member in the class under test is now
 variable inside the class                       fake; all other code remains unchanged.

 Layer depth 2: the dependency returned          Tell the factory class to return your fake dependency by
 from the factory class into the class under     setting a property. The member inside the factory class is
 test                                            fake; the class under test isn’t changed at all.

 Layer depth 3: the factory class that returns   Replace the instance of the factory class with a fake fac-
 the dependency                                  tory that returns your fake dependency. The factory is a
                                                 fake, which also returns a fake; the class under test isn’t
                                                 changed.




                 Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
70   CHAPTER 3       Using stubs to break dependencies




     The thing to understand about layers of indirection is that the deeper
     you go down the rabbit hole (down the code-base execution call stack)
     the better manipulation power you have over the code under test,
     because you create stubs that are in charge of more things down the
     line. But there’s also a bad side to this: the further you go down the lay-
     ers, the harder the test will be to understand, and the harder it will be
     to find the right place to put your seam. The trick is to find the right
     balance between complexity and manipulation power so that your tests
     remain readable but you get full control of the situation under test.
     For the scenario in listing 3.6 (using a factory), adding a constructor-
     level argument would complicate things when we already have a good
     possible target layer for our seam—the factory at depth 2. Layer 2 is
     the simplest to use here because the changes it requires in the code are
     minimal:
     ❂   Layer 1 (faking a member in the class under test)
         You would need to add a constructor, set the class in the construc-
         tor, set its parameters from the test, and worry about future uses of
         that API in the production code. This method would change the
         semantics of using the class under test, which is best avoided unless
         you have a good reason.
     ❂   Layer 2 (faking a member in a factory class)
         This method is easy. Add a setter to the factory and set it to a fake
         dependency of your choice. There’s no changing of the semantics of
         the code base, everything stays the same, and the code is dead sim-
         ple. The only con is that this method requires that you understand
         who calls the factory and when, which means you need to do some
         research before you can implement this easily. Understanding a code
         base you’ve never seen is a daunting task, but it still seems more rea-
         sonable than the other options.
     ❂   Layer 3 (faking the factory class)
         You would need to create your own version of a factory class, which
         may or may not have an interface. This means also creating an inter-
         face for it. Then you would need to create your fake factory instance,
         tell it to return your fake dependency class (a fake returning a



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                          Refactoring our design to be more testable   71




          fake—take note!), and then set the fake factory class on the class
          under test. A fake returning a fake is always a bit of a mind-boggling
          scenario, which is best avoided because it makes the test less under-
          standable.
Use a local factory method (Extract and Override)
        This method doesn’t reside in any of the layers listed in table 3.1; it cre-
        ates a whole new layer of indirection close to the surface of the code
        under test. The closer we get to the surface of the code, the less we need
        to muck around with changing dependencies. In this case, the class
        under test is also a dependency of sorts that we need to manipulate.
        In this scenario, we use a local virtual method in the class under test as a
        factory to get the instance of the extension manager. Because the
        method is marked as virtual, it can be overridden in a derived class,
        which creates our seam. We inject a stub into the class by inheriting a
        new class from the class under test, overriding the virtual factory
        method, and finally returning whatever instance the new class is con-
        figured to return in the overriding method. The tests are then per-
        formed on the new derived class. The factory method could also be
        called a stub method that returns a stub object. Figure 3.8 shows the
        flow of object instances.




Figure 3.8 We inherit from the class under test so we can override its virtual factory
method and return whatever object instance we want, as long as it implements IEx-
tensionManager. Then we perform our tests against the newly derived class.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
72   CHAPTER 3      Using stubs to break dependencies




     Here are the steps for using a factory method in your tests.
     ❂   In the class under test,
         • add a virtual factory method that returns the real instance.
         • use the factory method in your code, as usual.

     ❂   In your test project, create a new class:
         • Set the new class to inherit from the class under test.
         • Create a public field (no need for property get or set) of the inter-
           face type you want to replace (IExtensionManager).
         • Override the virtual factory method.
         • Return the public field.

     ❂   In your test code,
         • create an instance of a stub class that implements the required
           interface (IExtensionManager).
         • create an instance of the newly derived class, not of the class under test.
         • configure the new instance’s public field (which you created ear-
           lier) and set it to the stub you’ve instantiated in your test.
     When you test your class now, your production code will be using your
     stub through the overridden factory method.
     Listing 3.7 shows what the code might look like when using this method.
     Listing 3.7 Faking a factory method

     public class LogAnalyzerUsingFactoryMethod
         {
             public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
             {                                                         Uses virtual
                 return GetManager().IsValid(fileName);                GetManager()
             }                                                         method

                protected virtual IExtensionManager GetManager()
                {
                    return new FileExtensionManager();                  Returns
                }                                                       hardcoded
          }                                                             value

     [TestFixture]
         public class LogAnalyzerTests




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                    Refactoring our design to be more testable            73




      {
           [Test]
            public void overrideTest()
            {
                StubExtensionManager stub = new StubExtensionManager();
                stub.ShouldExtensionBeValid = true;
                                                            Creates instance of
                TestableLogAnalyzer logan =                 class derived from
                             new TestableLogAnalyzer();     class under test
                logan.Manager=stub;
                bool result = logan.IsValidLogFileName("file.ext");
                Assert.IsFalse(result,
            "File name should be too short to be considered valid");
            }
      }

      class    TestableLogAnalyzer
                              :LogAnalyzerUsingFactoryMethod
      {
            public IExtensionManager Manager;

            protected override IExtensionManager GetManager()
            {                                                                    Returns
                                                                                 what we
                return Manager;                                                  tell it to
            }
      }
      internal class StubExtensionManager : IExtensionManager
      {
          //no change from the previous samples
          ...
      }


The technique we’re using here is called Extract and Override, and you’ll find
it extremely easy to use once you’ve done it a couple of times. It’s a pow-
erful technique, and one I will put to other uses throughout this book.
TIP       You can learn more about this dependency-breaking technique and
          others in a book I have found to be worth its weight in gold: Working
          Effectively with Legacy Code by Michael Feathers.
Extract and Override is a powerful technique because it lets you
directly replace the dependency without going down the rabbit hole
(changing dependencies deep inside the call stack). That makes it quick



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
74    CHAPTER 3    Using stubs to break dependencies




      and clean to perform, and it almost corrupts your good sense of object-
      oriented aesthetics, leading you to code that might have fewer inter-
      faces but more virtual methods. I like to call this method “ex-crack and
      override” because it’s such a hard habit to let go of once you know it.
When you should use this method
      Extract and Override is great for simulating inputs into your code under
      test, but it’s cumbersome when you want to verify interactions that are
      coming out of the code under test into your dependency.
      For example, it’s great if your test code calls a web service and gets a
      return value, and you’d like to simulate your own return value. But it gets
      bad quickly if you want to test that your code calls out to the web service
      correctly. That requires lots of manual coding, and mock frameworks
      are better suited for such tasks (as you’ll see in the next chapter).
      Extract and Override is good if you’d like to simulate return values or
      simulate whole interfaces as return values, but not for checking inter-
      actions between objects.
      I use this technique a lot when I need to simulate inputs into my code
      under test, because it helps keep the changes to the semantics of the
      code base (new interfaces, constructors, and so on) a little more man-
      ageable. You need to make fewer of them to get the code into a testable
      state. The only times I don’t use this technique is when the code base
      clearly shows that there’s a path already laid out for me: there’s already
      an interface ready to be faked or there’s already a place where a seam
      can be injected. When these things don’t exist, and the class itself isn’t
      sealed (or can be made nonsealed without too much resentment from
      your peers), I check out this technique first, and only after that move
      on to more complicated options.

 3.5 Variations on refactoring techniques
      There are many variations on the preceding simple techniques to intro-
      duce seams into source code. For example, instead of adding a parame-
      ter to a constructor, you can add it directly to the method under test.
      Instead of sending in an interface, you could send a base class, and so
      on. Each variation has its own strengths and weaknesses.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                Variations on refactoring techniques   75




        One of the reasons you may want to avoid using a base class instead of
        an interface is that a base class from the production code may already
        have (and probably has) built-in production dependencies that you’ll
        have to know about and override. This makes implementing derived
        classes for testing harder than implementing an interface, which lets
        you know exactly what the underlying implementation is and gives you
        full control over it.
        In chapter 4, we’ll look at techniques that can help you avoid writing
        manual stub classes that implement interfaces, and instead use frame-
        works that can help do this at runtime.
        But for now, let’s look at another way to gain control over the code
        under test without using interfaces. You’ve already seen one way of
        doing this in the previous pages, but this method is so effective it
        deserves a discussion of its own.

3.5.1   Using Extract and Override to create stub results
        You’ve already seen an example of Extract and Override in section
        3.4.5. We derive from the class under test so that we can override a vir-
        tual method and force it to return our stub.
        But why stop there? What if you’re unable or unwilling to add a new
        interface every time you need control over some behavior in your code




Figure 3.9 Using Extract and Override to return a logical result instead of calling an
actual dependency. This uses a simple fake result instead of a stub.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
76   CHAPTER 3      Using stubs to break dependencies




     under test? In those cases, Extract and Override can help simplify
     things, because it doesn’t require writing and introducing new inter-
     faces—just deriving from the class under test and overriding some
     behavior in the class.
     Figure 3.9 shows another way we could have forced the code under
     test to always return true about the validity of the file extension.
     In the class under test, instead of virtualizing a factory method, we virtual-
     ize the calculation result. This means that, in our derived class, we over-
     ride the method and return whatever value we want, without needing
     to create an interface or a new stub. We simply inherit and override the
     method to return the desired result.
     Listing 3.8 shows how our code might look using this technique.
     Listing 3.8 Returning a result rather than a stub object from an extracted method

     public class LogAnalyzerUsingFactoryMethod
         {
             public bool IsValidLogFileName(string fileName)
             {
                 int len = fileName.Length;
                 return this.IsValid(fileName) && len>5;
             }

                protected virtual bool IsValid(string fileName)
                {
                     FileExtensionManager mgr = new FileExtensionManager();
                   return mgr.IsValid(fileName);
                }                                        Returns result from
         }                                                     real dependency

       [Test]
                public void overrideTestWithoutStub()
                {
                    TestableLogAnalyzer logan = new TestableLogAnalyzer();
                    logan.IsSupported = true;
                                                                   Sets fake
                 bool result =                                     result value
       logan.IsValidLogFileName("file.ext");
                 Assert.IsFalse(result,"...");
             }




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                            Overcoming the encapsulation problem   77




      class TestableLogAnalyzer: LogAnalyzerUsingFactoryMethod
          {
              public bool IsSupported;

                protected override bool IsValid(string fileName)
                {
                    return IsSupported;                       Returns fake
                }                                             value that was
          }                                                   set by the test


When you should use Extract and Override
      The basic motivation for using this technique is the same as for the
      method discussed in section 3.4.5. This technique is even simpler than
      the previous one. If I can, I use this technique over the previous one.
      By now, you may be thinking to yourself that adding all these construc-
      tors, setters, and factories for the sake of testing is problematic. It
      breaks some serious object-oriented principles, especially the idea of
      encapsulation, which says, “Hide everything that the user of your class
      doesn’t need to see.” That’s our next topic. (Appendix A also deals with
      testability and design issues.)

 3.6 Overcoming the encapsulation problem
      Some people feel that opening up the design to make it more testable is
      a bad thing because it hurts the object-oriented principles the design is
      based on. I can wholeheartedly say to those people, “Don’t be silly.”
      Object-oriented techniques are there to enforce some constraints on
      the end user of the API (the end user being the programmer who will
      use your object model) so that the object model is used properly and is
      protected from unforeseen ways of usage. Object orientation also has a
      lot to do with reuse of code and the single-responsibility principle
      (which requires that each class has only a single responsibility).
      When we write unit tests for our code, we are adding another end user
      (the test) to the object model. That end user is just as important as the
      original one, but it has different goals when using the model. The test
      has specific requirements from the object model that seem to defy the



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
78      CHAPTER 3     Using stubs to break dependencies




        basic logic behind a couple of object-oriented principles, mainly encap-
        sulation. Encapsulating those external dependencies somewhere without
        allowing anyone to change them, having private constructors or sealed
        classes, having nonvirtual methods that can’t be overridden: all these
        are classic signs of overprotective design. (Security-related designs are
        a special case that I forgive.) The problem is that the second end user
        of the API, the test, needs them as a feature in the code. I call the
        design that emerges from designing with testability in mind testable
        object-oriented design (TOOD), and you’ll hear more about TOOD in
        Appendix A.
        The concept of testable designs conflicts in places with the concept of
        object-oriented design. If you really need to consolidate these two
        worlds (to have your cake and eat it too), here are a few tips and tricks
        you can use to make sure that the extra constructors and setters don’t
        show up in release mode or at least don’t play a part in release mode.
        TIP    A good place to look at design objectives that adhere more to the idea of
               testable design is Bob Martin’s timeless SOLID design series of arti-
               cles. SOLID stands for Single Responsibility Principle, Open Closed
               Principle, Liskov Substitution Principle, Interface Segregation Princi-
               ple, and Dependency Inversion Principles. These principles can be
               found at http://butunclebob.com/ArticleS.UncleBob.PrinciplesOfOod.

3.6.1   Using internal and [InternalsVisibleTo]
        If you dislike adding a public constructor to your class that everyone
        can see, you can make it internal instead of public. You can then
        expose all internal related members and methods to your test assem-
        bly by using the [InternalsVisibleTo] assembly-level attribute. List-
        ing 3.9 shows this more clearly.
        Listing 3.9 Exposing internals to the tests assembly

        public class LogAnalyzer
            {
              ...
              internal LogAnalyzer (IExtensionManager extentionMgr)
                {
                    manager = extentionMgr;
                }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                             Overcoming the encapsulation problem   79




            ...
        }

        using System.Runtime.CompilerServices;
        [assembly:
               InternalsVisibleTo("AOUT.CH3.Logan.Tests")]


        Such code can usually be found in AssemblyInfo.cs files. Using inter-
        nal is a good solution if you have no other way of making things public
        to the test code.

3.6.2   Using the [Conditional] attribute
        The System.Diagnostics.ConditionalAttribute attribute is notable in
        its non-intuitive action. When you put this attribute on a method, you
        initialize the attribute with the string signifying a conditional build
        parameter that’s passed in as part of the build. (DEBUG and RELEASE are
        the two most common ones, and Visual Studio uses them by default
        according to your build type.)
        If the build flag is not present during the build, the callers to the anno-
        tated method won’t be included in the build. For example, this method
        will have all the callers to it removed during a release build, but the
        method itself will stay on:

        [Conditional ("DEBUG")]
        public void DoSomething()
        {
        }


        You can use this attribute on methods (but not on constructors) that
        you only want called in certain debug modes.
        NOTE      These annotated methods won’t be hidden from the production
                  code, which is different from how the next technique we’ll discuss
                  behaves.
        It’s important to note that using conditional compilation constructs in
        your production code can reduce its readability and increase its “spa-
        ghetti-ness.” Beware!



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
80      CHAPTER 3      Using stubs to break dependencies




3.6.3   Using #if and #endif with conditional compilation
        Putting your methods or special test-only constructors between #if
        and #endif constructs will make sure they only compile when that
        build flag is set, as shown in listing 3.10.
        Listing 3.10 Using special build flags

        #if DEBUG
                public LogAnalyzer (IExtensionManager extensionMgr)
                {
                    manager = extensionMgr;
                }
        #endif
        ...
        #if DEBUG
               [Test]
                public void
        IsValidFileName_NameLessThan6SupportedExtension_False()
                {
        ...
                    //create analyzer and inject stub
                    LogAnalyzer log =
                        new LogAnalyzer (myFakeManager);
                    ...
                }
        #endif


        This method is commonly used, but it can lead to code that looks
        messy. Consider using the [InternalsVisibleTo] attribute where you
        can, for clarity.

 3.7 Summary
        We started writing simple tests in the first couple of chapters, but we
        have dependencies in our tests that we need to find a way to override.
        We learned how to stub out those dependencies in this chapter, using
        interfaces and inheritance.
        A stub can be injected into your code in many different ways. The real
        trick is to locate the right layer of indirection, or to create one, and then
        use it as a seam from which you can inject your stub into running code.


               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                       Summary        81




The deeper you go down the layers of interactions, the harder it will be
to understand the test, and to understand the code under test and its
deep interactions with other objects. The closer you are to the surface
of the object under test, the easier your test will be to understand and
manage, but you may also be giving up some of your power to manipu-
late the environment of the object under test.
Learn the different ways of injecting a stub into your code. When you
master them, you’ll be in a much better position to pick and choose
which method you want to use when.
The Extract and Override method is great for simulating inputs into
the code under test, but if you’re also testing interactions between
objects (the topic of the next chapter), be sure to have it return an
interface rather than an arbitrary return value. It will make your test-
ing life easier.
Testable object-oriented design (TOOD) can present some interesting
advantages over classic object-oriented design, such as allowing main-
tainability while still permitting tests to be written against the code
base. If you really need them, there are several ways of hiding your
testable design in release mode, such as the [InternalsVisibleTo] and
the [Conditional] attributes.
In chapter 4, we’ll take a look at some other issues relating to depen-
dencies, and find ways to resolve them: how to avoid writing manual
stubs for interfaces, and how to test the interaction between objects as
part of your unit tests.




     Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
4

Interaction testing using
mock objects
     This chapter covers
            • Defining interaction testing
            • Understanding mock objects
            • Differentiating mocks and stubs
            • Exploring mock object best practices




     n the previous chapter, we solved the problem of testing code that

 I   depends on other objects to run correctly. We used stubs to make sure
     that the code under test received all the inputs it needed so that we could
     test its logic independently.
     In this chapter, we’ll look at how you test whether an object calls other
     objects correctly. The object being called may not return any result or save
     any state, but it has complex logic that needs to result in correct calls to
     other objects. Using the approach we’ve employed so far won’t do here,
     because there’s no externalized API that we can use to check if something
     has changed in the object under test. How do you test that your object
     interacts with other objects correctly? We’ll use mock objects.
     The first thing we need to do is define what interaction testing is, and
     how it’s different from the testing we’ve done so far—state-based testing.


                                         82



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                           State-based versus interaction testing   83




 4.1 State-based versus interaction testing
      We defined state-based testing in section 2.6 of chapter 2. Let’s define
      interaction testing, and then look at how we use it in our unit tests.

DEFINITION    Interaction testing is testing how an object sends input to or receives
              input from other objects—how that object interacts with other objects.
      You can also think of interaction testing as being “action-driven test-
      ing,” and state-based testing as being “result-driven testing.” Action-
      driven means that you test a particular action an object takes (such as
      sending a message to another object). Result-driven means you test that
      some end result is now true (that a property value has changed, for
      example). It’s usually preferable to check the end results of objects, not
      their particular actions. But sometimes interactions between objects
      are the end result. That’s when we need to test the interaction itself
      (where the end result of calling a method on the object under test is
      that the object then calls another object, such as a web service).
      Interaction testing, in one form or another, has existed since the first
      days of unit testing. Back then, there weren’t any names or patterns for
      it, but people still needed to know if one object called another object
      correctly.
      Let’s look at an example of the two types of testing. Say you have a
      watering system, and you have given your system specific instructions
      on when to water the tree in your yard: how many times a day and
      what quantity of water each time. Here’s how you’d test that it’s work-
      ing correctly:
      ❂   State-based testing—Run the system for a specific amount of time (say 12
        hours), and at the end of that time, check the state of the tree being
        irrigated. Is the land moist enough, is the tree doing well, are its leaves
        green, and so on. It may be quite a difficult test to perform, but assum-
        ing you can do it, you can find out if your watering system works.
      ❂ Interaction testing—At the end of the irrigation hose, set up a device

        that records when irrigation starts and stops, and how much water
        flows through the device. At the end of the day, check that the device



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
84    CHAPTER 4    Interaction testing using mock objects




         has been called the right number of times, with the correct quantity
         of water each time, and don’t worry about checking the tree. In fact,
         you don’t even need a tree to check that the system works. You can
         go further and modify the system clock on the irrigation unit, so that
         it thinks that the time to irrigate has arrived, and it will irrigate
         whenever you choose. That way, you don’t have to wait (for 12
         hours in this example) to find out whether it works.
      Sometimes state-based testing is the best way to go because interaction
      testing is too difficult to pull off. That’s the case with crash test dum-
      mies: a car is crashed into a standing target at a specific speed, and
      after the crash, both car and dummies’ states are checked to determine
      the outcomes. Running this sort of test as an interaction test in a lab
      can be too complicated, and a real-world state-based test is called for.
      (People are working on simulating crashes with computers, but it’s still
      not close to testing the real thing.)
      Now, back to the irrigation system. What is that device that records
      the irrigation information? It’s a fake water hose, or a stub, you could
      say. But it’s a smarter breed of stub—a stub that records the calls made
      to it. That’s partly what a mock object is.

DEFINITION   A mock object is a fake object in the system that decides whether the
             unit test has passed or failed. It does so by verifying whether the object
             under test interacted as expected with the fake object. There’s usually
             no more than one mock per test.
      A mock object may not sound much different from a stub, but the dif-
      ferences are large enough to warrant discussion and special syntax in
      various frameworks, as you’ll see in chapter 5. Let’s look at exactly
      what the difference is.

 4.2 The difference between mocks and stubs
      The distinction between mocks and stubs is important because a lot of
      today’s tools and frameworks (as well as articles) use these terms to
      describe different things. There’s a lot of confusion about what each
      term means, and many people seem to use them interchangeably. Once



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                   The difference between mocks and stubs   85




                                         Figure 4.1 When using a stub, the
                                         assert is performed on the class
                                         under test. The stub aids in making
                                         sure the test runs smoothly.


you understand the differences, you can evaluate the world of tools,
frameworks, and APIs more carefully and understand more clearly
what each does.
At first glance, the difference between mocks and stubs may seem small
or nonexistent. The distinction is subtle, but important, because many
of the mock object frameworks that we’ll deal with in the next chapters
use these terms to describe different behaviors in the framework. The
basic difference is that stubs can’t fail tests, and mocks can.
Stubs replace an object so that we can test another object without
problems. Figure 4.1 shows the interaction between the stub and the
class under test.
The easiest way to tell we’re dealing with a stub is to notice that the
stub can never fail the test. The asserts the test uses are always against
the class under test.
On the other hand, the test will use a mock object to verify whether the
test failed or not. Figure 4.2 shows the interaction between a test and a
mock object. Notice that the assert is performed on the mock.
Again, the mock object is the object we use to see if the test failed or not.



      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
86      CHAPTER 4       Interaction testing using mock objects




Figure 4.2 The class under test communicates with the mock object, and all
communication is recorded in the mock. The test uses the mock object to verify
that the test passes.




Figure 4.3 Our test will create a MockWebService to record messages that
LogAnalyzer will send. It will then assert against the MockWebService.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                              A simple manual mock example   87




    Let’s look at these ideas in action by building our own mock object.

4.3 A simple manual mock example
    Creating and using a mock object is much like using a stub, except that
    a mock will do a little more than a stub: it will save the history of com-
    munication, which will later be verified.
    Let’s add a new requirement to our LogAnalyzer class. This time, it will
    have to interact with an external web service that will receive an error
    message whenever the LogAnalyzer encounters a filename whose length
    is too short.
    Unfortunately, the web service we’d like to test against is still not fully
    functional, and even if it were, it would take too long to use it as part of
    our tests. Because of that, we’ll refactor our design and create a new
    interface for which we can later create a mock object. The interface will
    have the methods we’ll need to call on our web service, and nothing else.
    Figure 4.3 shows how our MockWebService will fit into the test.
    First off, let’s extract a simple interface that we can use in our code
    under test, instead of talking directly to the web service:

    public interface IWebService
    {
        void LogError(string message);
    }


    This interface will serve us when we want to create stubs as well as mocks.
    It will let us avoid an external dependency we have no control over.
    Next, we’ll create the mock object itself. It may look like a stub, but it
    contains one extra bit of code that makes it a mock object.

    public class MockService:IWebService
    {
        public string LastError;

        public void LogError(string message)
        {




          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
88   CHAPTER 4      Interaction testing using mock objects




                LastError = message;
          }
     }


     Our mock implements an interface, as a stub does, but it saves some
     state for later, so that our test can then assert and verify that our mock
     was called correctly.
     NOTE        According to xUnit Test Patterns by Gerard Meszaros, this would be
                 called a Test Spy.
     Listing 4.1 shows what the test might look like.
     Listing 4.1 Testing the LogAnalyzer with a mock object

     [Test]
      public void Analyze_TooShortFileName_CallsWebService()
       {
          MockService mockService = new MockService();
          LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(mockService);
          string tooShortFileName="abc.ext";
          log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

                Assert.AreEqual("Filename too short:abc.ext",         Asserts against
                                mockService.LastError);               mock object
      }

      public class LogAnalyzer
      {
         private IWebService service;

          public LogAnalyzer(IWebService service)
          {
              this.service = service;
          }

          public void Analyze(string fileName)
          {
              if(fileName.Length<8)
              {
                  service.LogError("Filename too short:"             Logs error in
                                  + fileName);                       production code
              }
          }
     }



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                           Using a mock and a stub together   89




    Notice how the assert is performed against the mock object, and not
    against the LogAnalyzer class. That’s because we’re testing the interac-
    tion between LogAnalyzer and the web service. We still use the same
    dependency injection techniques from chapter 3, but this time the
    mock object (used instead of a stub) also makes or breaks the test.
    Also notice that we aren’t writing the tests directly inside the mock
    object code. There are a couple of reasons for this:
    ❂ We’d like to be able to reuse the mock object in other test cases, with
      other asserts on the message.
    ❂ If the assert were put inside the mock object, whoever reads the test

      would have no idea what we’re asserting. We’d be hiding essential
      information from the test code, which hinders the readability and
      maintainability of the test.
    In your tests, you might find that you need to replace more than one
    object. We’ll look at combining mocks and stubs next.

4.4 Using a mock and a stub together
    Let’s consider a more elaborate problem. This time our LogAnalyzer not
    only needs to talk to a web service, but if the web service throws an
    error, LogAnalyzer has to log the error to a different external depen-
    dency, sending it by email to the web service administrator, as shown
    in figure 4.4.
    Here’s the logic we’d like to test inside LogAnalyzer:

    if(fileName.Length<8)
    {
       try
       {
         service.LogError("Filename too short:" + fileName);
       }
       catch (Exception e)
       {
           email.SendEmail("a","subject",e.Message);
       }
    }




          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
90     CHAPTER 4      Interaction testing using mock objects




Figure 4.4 LogAnalyzer has two external dependencies: web service and email ser-
vice. We need to test LogAnalyzer’s logic when calling them.

       Notice that there’s logic here that only applies to interacting with
       external objects; there’s no end result returned to the caller. How do
       you test that LogAnalyzer calls the email service correctly when the web
       service throws an exception?
       Here are the questions we’re faced with:
       ❂ How can we replace the web service?
       ❂ How can we simulate an exception from the web service so that we

         can test the call to the email service?
       ❂ How will we know that the email service was called correctly or at all?

       We can deal with the first two questions by using a stub for the web
       service. To solve the third problem, we can use a mock object for the
       email service.

DEFINITION     A fake is a generic term that can be used to describe either a stub or a mock
               object (handwritten or otherwise), because they both look like the real object.
               Whether a fake is a stub or a mock depends on how it’s used in the current
               test. If it’s used to check an interaction (asserted against), it’s a mock object.
               Otherwise, it’s a stub.

       In our test, we’ll have two fakes. One will be the email service mock,
       which we’ll use to verify that the correct parameters were sent to the



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                 Using a mock and a stub together   91




       email service. The other will be a stub that we’ll use to simulate an
       exception thrown from the web service. It’s a stub because we won’t be
       using the web service fake to verify the test result, only to make sure
       the test runs correctly. The email service is a mock because we’ll assert
       against it that it was called correctly. Figure 4.5 shows this visually.
       Here’s the interface for the email service, followed by the mock email
       service:

       public interface IEmailService
           {
               void SendEmail(string to, string subject, string body);
           }


       Listing 4.2 shows the code that implements figure 4.5.




Figure 4.5 The web service will be stubbed out to simulate an exception; then the
email sender will be mocked to see if it was called correctly. The whole test will be
about how LogAnalyzer interacts with other objects.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
92   CHAPTER 4     Interaction testing using mock objects




     Listing 4.2 Testing the LogAnalyzer with a mock and a stub

     public class LogAnalyzer2
         {
             private IWebService service;
             private IEmailService email;

              public IWebService Service
              {
                  get { return service; }
                  set { service = value; }
              }

              public IEmailService Email
              {
                  get { return email; }
                  set { email = value; }
              }

         public void Analyze(string fileName)
             {
                 if(fileName.Length<8)
                 {
                     try
                     {
                     service.LogError("Filename too short:" + fileName);
                     }
                     catch (Exception e)
                     {
                         email.SendEmail("a","subject",e.Message);
                     }
                 }
             }
         }

         [TestFixture]
          public class LogAnalyzer2Tests
          {
             [Test]
              public void Analyze_WebServiceThrows_SendsEmail()
              {
                 StubService stubService = new StubService();




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                     Using a mock and a stub together   93




          stubService.ToThrow=    new Exception("fake exception");

          MockEmailService mockEmail = new MockEmailService();

          LogAnalyzer2 log = new LogAnalyzer2();
      //we use setters instead of
      //constructor parameters for easier coding
          log.Service = stubService
          log.Email=mockEmail;                 ? Using properties instead
                                                 of constructor injection

          string tooShortFileName="abc.ext";
          log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

          Assert.AreEqual("a",mockEmail.To);
          Assert.AreEqual("fake exception",mockEmail.Body);
          Assert.AreEqual("subject",mockEmail.Subject);
      }
}

public class StubService:IWebService
{
    public Exception ToThrow;
    public void LogError(string message)
    {
        if(ToThrow!=null)
        {
            throw ToThrow;
        }
    }
}

public class MockEmailService:IEmailService
{
    public string To;
    public string Subject;
    public string Body;

      public void SendEmail(string to,
                            string subject,
                            string body)
      {
          To = to;




    Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
94   CHAPTER 4     Interaction testing using mock objects




                   Subject = subject;
                   Body = body;
               }
         }


     Note that the public properties ? we’ve added will be used instead of a
     constructor. We’ll use these setters to set the stub and mock, which will
     make the code easier to read and maintain.
     This code raises some interesting questions:
     ❂ Why are we doing several asserts in a single test? How easy would it
       be to separate this test into three different tests with one assert each?
       Could the three asserts be combined into a single logical test?
     ❂ It can be quite tedious to create manual mocks and stubs for each

       test or test class. How can we overcome that?
     ❂ Couldn’t we have used the MockService from listing 4.1 as a stub?

     We’ll explore answers to these questions in the rest of this and the next
     chapter.
     One important thing to consider is how many mocks and stubs you can
     use in a test.

 4.5 One mock per test
     In a test where you test only one thing (which is how I recommend you
     write tests), there should be no more than one mock object. All other
     fake objects will act as stubs. Having more than one mock per test usu-
     ally means you’re testing more than one thing, and this can lead to com-
     plicated or brittle tests. (Look for more on this in chapter 7.)
     If you follow this guideline, when you get to more complicated tests,
     you can always ask yourself, “Which one is my mock object?” Once
     you’ve identified it, you can leave the others as stubs and not worry
     about assertions against them.
     Next, we’ll deal with a more complex scenario: using a stub to return a
     stub or a mock that will be used by the application.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                           Stub chains: stubs that produce mocks or other stubs   95




4.6 Stub chains: stubs that produce mocks or other stubs
    One of the most common scamming techniques online these days fol-
    lows a simple path. A fake email is sent to a massive number of recipi-
    ents. The fake email is from a fake bank or online service claiming that
    the potential customer needs to have a balance checked or to change
    some account details on the online site.
    All the links in the email point to a fake site. It looks exactly like the
    real thing, but its only purpose is to collect data from innocent custom-
    ers of that business. This simple “chain of lies” is known as a “phishing”
    attack, and is more lucrative that you’d imagine. Most people respond
    instinctively to these emails and do what’s asked. Consequently, it’s
    one of the biggest threats to identity theft in the world.
    How does this “chain of lies” matter to us? Sometimes we want to have
    a fake component return another fake component, producing our own
    little chain of stubs in our tests, so that we can end up collecting some
    data during our test. A stub leads to a mock object that records data.
    The design of many systems under test allows for complex object
    chains to be created. It’s not uncommon to find code like this:

    IServiceFactory factory = GetServiceFactory();
    IService service = factory.GetService();


    Or like this:

    String connstring =
    GlobalUtil.Configuration.DBConfiguration.ConnectionString;


    Suppose you wanted to replace the connection string with one of your
    own during a test. You could set up the Configuration property of the
    GlobalUtil object to be a stub object. Then, you could set the DBConfig-
    uration property on that object to be another stub object, and so on.

    It’s a powerful technique, but you need to ask yourself whether it
    might not be better to refactor your code to do something like this:



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
96   CHAPTER 4   Interaction testing using mock objects




     String connstring =GetConnectionString();
     Protected virtual string GetConnectionString()
     {
         Return GlobalUtil.Configuration.DBConfiguration.ConnectionString;
     }


     You could then override the virtual method as described in section
     3.4.5 in chapter 3. This can make the code easier to read and maintain,
     and it doesn’t require adding new interfaces to insert two more stubs
     into the system.
     TIP   Another good way to avoid call chains is to create special wrapper
           classes around the API that simplify using and testing it. For more
           about this method, see Michael Feathers’ book, Working Effectively with
           Legacy Code. The pattern is called “Adapt Parameter” in that book.

     Handwritten mocks and stubs have benefits, but they also have their
     share of problems. Let’s take a look at them.

 4.7 The problems with handwritten mocks and stubs
     There are several issues that crop up when using manual mocks and
     stubs:
     ❂ It takes time to write the mocks and stubs.
     ❂ It’s difficult to write stubs and mocks for classes and interfaces that

       have many methods, properties, and events.
     ❂ To save state for multiple calls of a mock method, you need to write a

       lot of boilerplate code to save the data.
     ❂ If you want to verify all parameters on a method call, you need to

       write multiple asserts. If the first assert fails, the others will never
       run, because a failed assert throws an exception.
     ❂ It’s hard to reuse mock and stub code for other tests.

     These problems are inherent in manually written mocks and stubs.
     Fortunately, there are other ways to create mocks and stubs, as you’ll
     see in the next chapter.



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                             Summary       97




4.8 Summary
   This chapter covered the distinction between stub and mock objects. A
   mock object is like a stub, but it also helps you to assert something in
   your test. A stub, on the other hand, can never fail your test and is
   strictly there to simulate various situations. This distinction is impor-
   tant because many of the mock object frameworks you’ll see in the next
   chapter have these definitions engrained in them, and you’ll need to
   know when to use which.
   Combining stubs and mocks in the same test is a powerful technique,
   but you must take care to have no more than one mock in each test.
   The rest of the fake objects should be stubs that can’t break your test.
   Following this practice can lead to more maintainable tests that break
   less often when internal code changes.
   Stubs that produce other stubs or mocks can be a powerful way to
   inject fake dependencies into code that uses other objects to get its
   data. It’s a great technique to use with factory classes and methods.
   You can even have stubs that return other stubs that return other stubs
   and so on, but at some point you’ll wonder if it’s all worth it. In that
   case, take a look at the techniques described in chapter 3 for injecting
   stubs into your design. (Only one mock framework currently allows
   stubbing a full call chain in one line of code—creating stubs that return
   stubs—and that’s Typemock Isolator.)
   One of the most common problems encountered by people who write
   tests is using mocks too much in their tests. You should rarely verify
   calls to fake objects that are used both as mocks and as stubs in the
   same test. (This is quite a narrow corner case. You verify a function
   was called. Because it’s still a function, it must return some value, and
   because you’re faking that method, you’ll need to tell the test what that
   value will be. This value is the part in the test that’s a stub, because it
   has nothing to do with asserting whether the test passes or fails.) If you
   see “verify” and “stub” on the same variable in the same test, you most
   likely are overspecifying your test, which will make it more brittle.




         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
98   CHAPTER 4   Interaction testing using mock objects




     You can have multiple stubs in a test, because a class may have multiple
     dependencies. Just make sure your test remains readable. Structure
     your code nicely so the reader of the test understands what’s going on.
     You may find that writing manual mocks and stubs is inconvenient for
     large interfaces or for complicated interaction-testing scenarios. It is,
     and there are better ways to do this, as we’ll see in the next chapter. But
     often you’ll find that handwritten mocks and stubs still beat frame-
     works for simplicity and readability. The art lies in when you use which.
     Our next chapter deals with mock object frameworks, which allow you
     to automatically create, at runtime, stub or mock objects and use them
     with at least the same power as manual mocks and stubs, if not more.




           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
5

Isolation (mock object)
frameworks
     This chapter covers
            • Understanding isolation frameworks
            • Defining fake objects
            • Using Rhino Mocks to create stubs and mocks
            • Surveying advanced use cases for mocks and stubs
            • Exploring arrange-act-assert and record-and-replay syntax
            • Avoiding common misuses of isolation frameworks




     n the previous chapter, we looked at writing mocks and stubs manually

 I   and saw the challenges involved. In this chapter, we’ll look at some
     elegant solutions for these problems in the form of a mock object
     framework—a reusable library that can create and configure stub and mock
     objects at runtime. These objects are usually referred to as dynamic stubs and
     dynamic mocks.

     We’ll start this chapter off with an overview of mock object frameworks
     (or isolation frameworks—the word mock is too overloaded already) and
     what they can do for us. We’ll then take a closer look at one specific
     framework: Rhino Mocks. We’ll see how we can use it to test various
     things and to create stubs, mocks, and other interesting things.


                                          99



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
100   CHAPTER 5    Isolation (mock object) frameworks




      Later in this chapter, we’ll contrast Rhino Mocks with other frame-
      works currently available to .NET developers, and we’ll finish with a
      list of things to watch out for when using such frameworks in your tests.
      Let’s start at the beginning: What are isolation frameworks?

 5.1 Why use isolation frameworks?
      We’ll start with a basic definition.

DEFINITION   An isolation framework is a set of programmable APIs that make creat-
             ing mock and stub objects much easier. Isolation frameworks save the
             developer from the need to write repetitive code to test or simulate
             object interactions.
      This definition may sound a bit bland, but it needs to be generic in
      order to include the various isolation frameworks out there.
      Isolation frameworks exist for most languages that have a unit-testing
      framework associated with them. For example, C++ has mockpp and
      other frameworks, and Java has jMock and EasyMock, among others.
      .NET has NMock, Moq, Typemock Isolator, and Rhino Mocks.
      Using isolation frameworks instead of writing mocks and stubs manu-
      ally, as in previous chapters, has several advantages that make develop-
      ing more elaborate and complex tests easier, faster, and less error-prone.
      The best way to understand the value of an isolation framework is to
      see a problem and solution. One problem that might occur when using
      handwritten mocks and stubs is repetitive code.
      Assume you have an interface a little more complicated than the ones
      shown so far:

      public interface IComplicatedInterface
          {
              void Method1(string a, string b, bool c, int x, object o);
              void Method2(string b, bool c, int x, object o);
              void Method3(bool c, int x, object o);
          }




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                               Why use isolation frameworks?   101




Creating a handwritten stub or mock for this interface may be time-
consuming, because we’d need to remember the parameters on a per-
method basis, as listing 5.1 shows.
Listing 5.1 Implementing complicated interfaces with handwritten stubs

class MytestableComplicatedInterface:IComplicatedInterface
    {
        public string meth1_a;
        public string meth1_b,meth2_b;
        public bool meth1_c,meth2_c,meth3_c;
        public int meth1_x,meth2_x,meth3_x;
        public int meth1_0,meth2_0,meth3_0;

        public void Method1(string a,
string b, bool c,
int x, object o)
        {
            meth1_a = a;
            meth1_b = b;
            meth1_c = c;
            meth1_x = x;
            meth1_0 = 0;
        }

          public void Method2(string b, bool c, int x, object o)
          {
              meth2_b = b;
              meth2_c = c;
              meth2_x = x;
              meth2_0 = 0;
          }

          public void Method3(bool c, int x, object o)
          {
              meth3_c = c;
              meth3_x = x;
              meth3_0 = 0;
          }
    }


Not only is this test time-consuming and cumbersome to write, what
happens if we want to test that a method is called many times? Or if we



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
102     CHAPTER 5      Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        want it to return a specific value based on the parameters it receives, or
        to remember all the values for all the method calls on the same method
        (the parameter history)? The code gets ugly fast.
        Using an isolation framework, the code for doing this becomes trivial,
        readable, and much shorter, as you’ll see when you create your first
        dynamic mock object.
        NOTE        The word fake was introduced in chapter 4 as a generic term for
                    either a stub or a mock.

 5.2 Dynamically creating a fake object
        Let’s define dynamic fake objects, and how they’re different from regular
        mocks.
DEFINITION     A dynamic fake object is any stub or mock that’s created at runtime with-
               out needing to use a handwritten implementation of an interface or
               subclass.
        Using dynamic fakes removes the need to hand-code classes that imple-
        ment interfaces or that derive from other classes, because this can be
        generated for the developer at runtime by a simple line of code.

5.2.1   Introducing Rhino Mocks into your tests
        In this chapter, we’ll use Rhino Mocks, an isolation framework that’s
        open source and freely downloadable from http://ayende.com. It’s sim-
        ple and quick to use, with little overhead in learning how to use the
        API. I’ll walk you through a few examples, and then we’ll explore
        other frameworks and discuss the differences among them.
        The only thing you’ll need to do to use Rhino Mocks, after download-
        ing and unzipping it, (assuming you have NUnit installed on your
        machine) is to add a reference to the Rhino.Mocks.Dll. In the Add
        Reference dialog of the test project, click Browse, and locate the down-
        loaded DLL file (which you can get from http://www.ayende.com/proj-
        ects/rhino-mocks/downloads.aspx).
        Rhino Mocks allows us to create and use fakes in two different ways.
        The first one is the record-and-replay model, and is the one you’ll be see-



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Dynamically creating a fake object   103




        ing most in this chapter. The other is the arrange-act-assert model, which
        I’ll be discussing near the end of this chapter.
        Rhino Mocks contains in its API a class called MockRepository that has
        special methods for creating mocks and stubs. The first one we’ll look
        at is StrictMock(). The method is called with a generic parameter
        matching the type of an interface or class that you’d like to fake, and it
        dynamically creates a fake object that adheres to that interface at run-
        time. You don’t need to implement that new object in real code.

5.2.2   Replacing a handwritten mock object with a dynamic one
        As an example, let’s look at a handwritten mock object used to check
        whether a call to the log was performed correctly. Listing 5.2 shows the
        test class and the handwritten mock.

        Listing 5.2 Asserting against a handwritten mock object

         [TestFixture]
          public class LogAnalyzerTests
          {
               [Test]
                public void Analyze_TooShortFileName_CallsWebService()
                {
                   ManualMockService mockService = new ManualMockService ();
                    LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(mockService);
                    string tooShortFileName="abc.ext";
                    log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);
                Assert.AreEqual("Filename too short:abc.ext",
                    mockService.LastError);
                }
            }
            public class ManualMockService:IWebService
            {
                public string LastError;

                public void LogError(string message)
                {
                    LastError = message;
                }
           }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
104   CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




      The parts of the code in bold are the parts that will change when we
      start using dynamic mock objects.
      We’ll now create a dynamic mock object, and eventually replace the
      earlier test. Listing 5.3 shows a simple piece of code that creates a sim-
      ulated object based on an interface using the record-and-replay syntax
      in Rhino Mocks.
      Listing 5.3 Creating a dynamic mock object using Rhino Mocks

      [Test]
       public void Analyze_TooShortFileName_ErrorLoggedToService()
       {
       MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
       IWebService simulatedService =                      ? Creates dynamic
                                                              mock object
       mocks.StrictMock<IWebService>();

        using(mocks.Record())
        {
            simulatedService                                 w Sets
                                                               expectation
       .LogError("Filename too short:abc.ext");
        }

              LogAnalyzer log =
                  new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);
             string tooShortFileName="abc.ext";                      e Invokes
                                                                       LogAnalyzer
             log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

       mocks.Verify(simulatedService);
       }
                                                           ? Asserts expectations
                                                             have been met


      A couple of lines rid us of the need to use a handwritten stub or mock,
      because they generate one dynamically ?. The simulatedService
      object instance is a dynamically generated object that implements the
      IWebService interface, but there’s no implementation inside any of the
      IWebService methods.

      Next, we set the simulated service object into a “record” state. This is a
      special state where each method call on the simulated object is recorded
      as an expectation that something should happen to our simulated object
      w. These expectations will later be verified by calling mockEngine.Verify-


            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                          Dynamically creating a fake object   105




All() or preferably by calling mockEngine.Verify(mockObject). In this
case, we only have one expectation—that LogError() will be called with
the exact input of "file name was too short".


  Expectations on mocks and stubs
  An expectation on a fake object is an ad hoc rule that’s set on the object.

  • Expectations on mocks—The rule will usually tell the object that a specif-
     ic method call on that object is expected to happen later. It may also
     define how many times it should be called, whether or not the object
     should throw an exception when that call arrives, or perhaps that the
     call to this method should never be expected. Expectations are usual-
     ly set on mock objects during the recording phase of the object, and
     they’re verified at the end of the test where the mock object lives.

     You set expectations on mocks using the static method of MockRe-
     pository.StrictMock<T> or MockRespository.DynamicMock<T>.

  • Expectations on stubs—This wording may feel unintuitive at first, but
     the rule can tell the stub what value to return based on expected
     method calls, whether to throw exceptions, and so on. These expec-
     tations aren’t to be verified at the end of the test. They’re there so
     that you can run the test and simulate some alternative reality for
     your code under test.

     You create stubs and set expectations on them using
     MockRepository.GenerateStub<T> or the instance method of
     MockRepository.Stub<T>.



Then we invoke the object under test—our LogAnalyzer—by injecting
it with our mock object and sending in a short filename that should
make it invoke the logger internally e.
The last step in this test is to do some sort of assert. In this case, we’ll
need to find a way to assert that all the expectations have been met by
our mock object (that LogError was indeed called with the correct
string). We can do this by using mocks.Verify(simulatedService) ?.
The Verify(mock) method will go through each of the expectations that
we’ve set on our mock object and make sure they’re true (called cor-
rectly).



      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
106     CHAPTER 5    Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        What happens if the implementation of log.Analyze() contains an
        unexpected call to the service, either through an unexpected parameter
        value or an unexpected method call that we never recorded?

        public void Analyze(string fileName)
        {
            if(fileName.Length<8)
            {
        // expected "Filename too short:abc.extfile name was too short"
                service.LogError("bad string");
            }
        }


        The test will fail, but it won’t fail when calling the Verify() method. It
        will fail before that, during the test run when the call to LogError() is exe-
        cuted. The test will never get to the Verify() line because an exception
        will be thrown before that. To understand why, we’ll review the idea of
        strict and nonstrict mocks.

 5.3 Strict versus nonstrict mock objects
        Let’s discuss what strict and nonstrict mocks mean, and why I consider
        nonstrict mocks better for most tests.

5.3.1   Strict mocks
        A strict mock object can only be called by methods that were explicitly set
        via expectations. Any call that differs either by the parameter values
        defined or by the method name will usually be handled by throwing an
        exception. The test will fail on the first unexpected method call to a strict
        mock object. I say “usually” because whether or not the mock throws
        an exception depends on the implementation of the isolation frame-
        work. Some frameworks allow you to define whether to delay all
        exceptions until calling verify() at the end of the test.
        This means that a strict mock can fail in two ways: when an unex-
        pected method is called on it, or when expected methods aren’t called
        on it (which is determined by calling Verify()).



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                Strict versus nonstrict mock objects   107




        In Rhino Mocks, strict mocks are created by calling the StrictMock<T>
        method. Unexpected method call exceptions will always be thrown,
        even if your test contains a global try-catch clause, which you’d think
        would catch such an exception thrown from the isolation framework.

5.3.2   Nonstrict mocks
        Most of the time, nonstrict mocks make for less brittle tests. A nonstrict
        mock object will allow any call to be made to it, even if it was not
        expected. As long as the call doesn’t require a return value, it will do
        what’s necessary for everything in the test to work out.
        If a method that needs to return a value is called, and you did not set up
        a return value when you set up that mock object, a Rhino Mocks non-
        strict mock or stub object can return the default value for that method’s
        return type (0 or null usually). Other frameworks may take different
        approaches and may throw an exception if the method isn’t configured
        to return anything.
        A nonstrict mock can only fail a test if an expected method was not
        called. You have to call the Verify(mock) method to find out if such a
        call is missing from the interaction, or the test will pass.
        The example in listing 5.3 uses a strict mock approach, which is why
        running the test fails mid-test instead of when calling Verify(). By call-
        ing MockRepository.DynamicMock<type>() instead of MockReposi-
        tory.StrictMock<Type>(), you’ll get a test that only fails on the last line.

        Listing 5.4 shows how the test from listing 5.3 would look if we used a
        nonstrict mock object with Rhino Mocks.
        Listing 5.4 Creating a nonstrict mock

        [Test]
         public void Analyze_TooShortFileName_ErrorLoggedToService()
         {
         MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
         IWebService simulatedService =
           MockRespository.DynamicMock<IWebService>();

          using(mocks.Record())
          {




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
108   CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




      //we expected "Filename too short:abc.ext"
           simulatedService.LogError("bad string");
      }

              LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);
             string tooShortFileName="abc.ext";
             log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

      mocks.VerifyAll();
      }


      Mocks created with an isolation framework can also be used as stubs.
      We can tell them to return simulated values and create other interest-
      ing effects. The next section shows how to do that.

 5.4 Returning values from fake objects
      To return values from fake objects, you’ll almost always want to create
      a stub, and not a mock object. That means you can use either the static
      MockRepository.GenerateStub<T> method or the Stub<T> instance
      method. You’ll see this in the next section.
      You won’t often need to, but you can also return values using mock
      objects, so let’s look at how to do that. You can instruct the mock
      object to return a value based on a method call by using a special class
      called LastCall.
      Listing 5.5 shows how we can return a value from a mock object when
      the interface method has a nonvoid return value. For this example, we’ll
      add an IGetResults interface into the system. During the recording
      stage, we use the LastCall class to set the return value for that method
      call when that specific input (a, in this case) is sent to the method.
      Listing 5.5 Returning a value from a mock object using the LastCall class

      [Test]
       public void ReturnResultsFromMock()
       {
          MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
           IGetResults resultGetter = mocks.DynamicMock<IGetResults>();




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Returning values from fake objects        109




    using(mocks.Record())                               ?
    {
        resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");
        LastCall.Return(1);                                  Forces method call
                                                             to return value
          resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");
          LastCall.Return(2);

          resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("b");
          LastCall.Return(3);
    }

    int result = resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("b");
    Assert.AreEqual(3, result);

    int result2 = resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");
    Assert.AreEqual(1, result2);

    int result3 = resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");
    Assert.AreEqual(2, result3);
}


As you can see in listing 5.5, there are three expectations set on the
mock object, and after each one we set the result to be returned from
these method calls. Our mock object will be smart enough to return the
correct value based on the input that was set in the expectation. If the
same input is set with different return values, they will be returned in
the order the code has added them.
You’ll notice that, after the recording stage ?, we call GetSomeNumber
with the b input, but the test will still pass, which means the order of
the calls doesn’t matter.

NOTE       If we wanted the order to matter, we could use a concept called
           ordered mocks, which are used to define the correct order in which
           calls and return values should be executed. You can find out more
           about ordered mocks on the Rhino Mocks website.
If we change the order of the last two asserts in the test (which both
input a), the test will fail because the recording order matters when the
input is the same for the expectations.



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
110     CHAPTER 5      Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        You can also use LastCall to set the method call to throw a specific
        exception:
          LastCall.Throw(Exception)

        Or you can even execute your own delegate:
          LastCall.Do(yourdelegatehere)

        Again, it’s usually a bad idea to tell a mock to return a value and also to
        verify mock expectations. In this case, your test may be overspecified;
        it checks too many things and can break easily. A fake object should
        either be used as a mock or as a stub, not both.
        Stubs are usually more appropriate for returning fake values than
        mock objects, and isolation frameworks can also create them.

 5.5 Creating smart stubs with an isolation framework
        A stub returns the appropriate responses when called and is never used
        to see if a test passes or not. Calling VerifyAll() or Verify(stub)
        won’t verify anything against stub objects—only against mocks. Most
        isolation frameworks contain the semantic notion of a stub, and Rhino
        Mocks is no exception.

5.5.1   Creating a stub in Rhino Mocks
        Listing 5.6 shows how you create a stub object in Rhino Mocks.
        Listing 5.6 Creating a stub is remarkably similar to creating a mock object

        [Test]
         public void ReturnResultsFromStub()
         {
             MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
             IGetResults resultGetter = mocks.Stub<IGetResults>();
             using(mocks.Record())
             {
                 resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");
                 LastCall.Return(1);

              }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                 Creating smart stubs with an isolation framework           111




      int result = resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");
      Assert.AreEqual(1, result);
 }


The syntax for creating a stub is almost the same as for mock objects.
But consider what happens if you run a test that doesn’t call an
expected method on the stub, but still verifies expectations. This is
shown in listing 5.7.
Listing 5.7 Verifying expectations on a stub object can’t fail a test

[Test]
 public void StubNeverFailsTheTest()
    {
        MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
        IGetResults resultGetter = mocks.Stub<IGetResults>();
        using(mocks.Record())
        {
            resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("a");      Specifies a rule,
            LastCall.Return(1);                   not an expectation

           }
           resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("b");
           mocks.Verify(resultGetter);                           Will never fail on stubs
     }


The test in listing 5.7 will still pass because the stub, by definition, is
incapable of breaking a test. Any expectations set on it are purely to
determine the return value or the exceptions they should throw.
Rhino Mocks contains a handy feature that isn’t supported by most
frameworks (except Typemock Isolator). For simple properties on
stub objects, get and set properties are automatically implemented and
can be used as if the stub were a real object. You can still set up a
return value for a property, but you don’t need to do it for each and
every property on a stub object. Here’s an example:

ISomeInterfaceWithProperties stub =
    mocks.Stub<ISomeInterfaceWithProperties>();




         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
112     CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        stub.Name = "Itamar";
        Assert.AreEqual("Itamar",stub.Name);


        We can also simulate an exception using expectations on a stub. Listing
        5.8 shows how you would simulate an OutOfMemoryException.

        Listing 5.8 Faking an exception using the LastCall class

        [Test]
         public void StubSimulatingException()
            {
                MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
                IGetResults resultGetter = mocks.Stub<IGetResults>();
                using(mocks.Record())
                {
                    resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("A");
                    LastCall.Throw(
         new OutOfMemoryException("The system is out of memory!")
         );
                }
                resultGetter.GetSomeNumber("A");
            }



        This test will fail due to a nasty out-of-memory exception. That’s how
        easy it is.
        In the next section, we’ll use this ability to simulate errors when testing
        a more complex scenario.

5.5.2   Combining dynamic stubs and mocks
        We’ll use the example from listing 4.2 in chapter 4, where we talked
        about LogAnalyzer using a MailSender class and a WebService class. This
        is shown in figure 5.1.
        We want to make sure that, if the service throws an exception, LogAna-
        lyzer will use MailSender to send an email to an administrator.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                     Creating smart stubs with an isolation framework   113




Figure 5.1 The web service will be stubbed out to simulate an exception, and the
email sender will be mocked to see if it was called correctly. The whole test will be
about how LogAnalyzer interacts with other objects.

        Listing 5.9 shows what the logic looks like with all the tests passing.
        Listing 5.9 The method under test and a test that uses handwritten mocks and stubs

        public void Analyze(string fileName)
        {
                    if(fileName.Length<8)
                    {
                        try
                        {
                        service.LogError("Filename too short:" + fileName);
                        }
                        catch (Exception e)
                        {
                            email.SendEmail("a","subject",e.Message);
                        }
                    }
            //..other logic
         }




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
114   CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




              [Test]
               public void Analyze_WebServiceThrows_SendsEmail()
               {
                   StubService stubService = new StubService();
                   stubService.ToThrow= new Exception("fake exception");

                    MockEmailService mockEmail = new MockEmailService();

                   LogAnalyzer2 log = new LogAnalyzer2();
               //we use setters instead of
               //constructor parameters for easier coding
                   log.Service = stubService;
                   log.Email=mockEmail;

                    string tooShortFileName="abc.ext";
                    log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

                    Assert.AreEqual("a",mockEmail.To);
                    Assert.AreEqual("fake exception",mockEmail.Body);
                    Assert.AreEqual("subject",mockEmail.Subject);
              }
          }
          public class StubService:IWebService
          {
              ...
          }

          public class MockEmailService:IEmailService
          {
              ...
          }


      Listing 5.10 shows what the test could look like if we used Rhino
      Mocks.
      Listing 5.10 Converting the previous test into one that uses dynamic mocks and stubs

       [Test]
        public void Analyze_WebServiceThrows_SendsEmail()
        {
            MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
            IWebService stubService =
                    mocks.Stub<IWebService>();
            IEmailService mockEmail =




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Parameter constraints for mocks and stubs   115




                      mocks.StrictMock<IEmailService>();

              using(mocks.Record())
              {                                                     Ensures
                  stubService.LogError("whatever");               ? exception
                  LastCall.Constraints(Is.Anything());              is thrown
                  LastCall.Throw(new Exception("fake exception"));

                  mockEmail.SendEmail("a","subject","fake exception");
              }

              LogAnalyzer2 log = new LogAnalyzer2();
              log.Service = stubService;
              log.Email = mockEmail;

              string tooShortFileName = "abc.ext";
              log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

              mocks.VerifyAll();
          }


        The nice thing about this test is that it requires no handwritten mocks,
        and it’s still readable for the developer.
        You might notice a line in listing 5.10 that you haven’t come across yet
        ?. That’s a parameter constraint that makes sure the exception is
        thrown no matter what we send the stub as a parameter. Parameter
        constraints are the topic of the next section.

 5.6 Parameter constraints for mocks and stubs
        Isolation frameworks enable us to easily test the value of parameters
        being passed into our mock objects. In the coming sections, we’ll look
        at the various ways you can check parameters, such as strings, proper-
        ties, and full object models, using very little code.

5.6.1   Checking parameters with string constraints
        Consider the following scenario. We’d like to test that our LogAnalyzer
        sends a message of this nature to the error log:
          "[Some GUID] Error message"




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
116   CHAPTER 5      Isolation (mock object) frameworks




      Here’s an example:
         "33DFCC9D-D6C5-45ea-A520-A6018C88E490 Out of memory"

      In our test, we don’t care about the GUID (globally unique identifier)
      at the beginning, but we care what the error message is. In fact, we
      don’t really have control over the GUID. (We could gain control by
      creating some sort of IGuidCreator interface and stubbing it out in the
      test, but that might prove a little too much work for what we need.)
      Parameter constraints allow us to specify demands or rules to our
      mocks and stubs for each specific parameter to a method call. Isolation
      frameworks allow you to create these parameter constraints, and each
      framework has its own syntax for doing so.
      The simplest way to use constraints, as shown in listing 5.11, is by
      using the LastCall class in conjunction with one of the constraints
      classes. In our case, it would be the Contains class, which takes as a
      constructor the inner string to search for.
      Listing 5.11 Using a string constraint in a test

       [Test]
        public void SimpleStringConstraints()
        {
            MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
            IWebService mockService = mocks.CreateMock<IWebService>();
            using (mocks.Record())
            {
                mockService.LogError("ignored string");
                LastCall.Constraints(new Contains("abc"));
            }

             mockService.LogError(Guid.NewGuid() + " abc");
             mocks.VerifyAll();
        }


      Using the LastCall.Constraints() method, we can send in a constraint
      object (which has to inherit from AbstractConstraint, defined as part
      of Rhino Mocks) for each parameter the method expects. There are
      four major “helper” classes for constraints in Rhino Mocks, listed in



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                 Parameter constraints for mocks and stubs     117




       table 5.1. For string-related constraints, we have Contains, EndsWith,
       Like, and StartsWith. All of these classes take a string at the construc-
       tor. To help you use these constraints, Rhino Mocks includes a helper
       class called Text that has static methods to return these constraint
       objects.
       Here’s the same test using the Text class:
           LastCall.Constraints(Text.Contains("abc"));

       Table 5.1 The four types of constraints in Rhino Mocks

 Helper class                  Description                                 Methods

Text                Checks string-related constraints      Contains(string)
                                                           EndsWith(string)
                                                           StartsWith(string)
                                                           Like(string)

List                Checks collection-related con-         Count(constraint)
                    straints                               Element(int, constraint)
                                                           Equal(IEnumerable)
                                                           IsIn(object)
                                                           OneOf(IEnumerable)

Is                  Checks the direct value of param-      Anything()
                    eters passed in                        Equal(object)
                                                           GreaterThan(IComparable)
                                                           LessThan(IComparable)
                                                           Matching<T>(Predicate<T>)
                                                           NotNull()
                                                           Same(object)
                                                           TypeOf(Type)

Property            Checks the value of a specific         IsNull()
                    property on an object that’s           Value(Type, PropertyName, object)
                    passed in as a parameter
                                                           ValueConstraint(Type,
                                                           PropertyName, constraint)

And, Or             Allows combining multiple con-
                    straints into a single logical con-
                    straint

Callback            Allows triggering a custom dele-
                    gate whenever the method is
                    called




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
118     CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        Some of the more interesting constraints are Property constraints, And
        and Or constraints, and Callback constraints. Let’s review them one
        by one.

5.6.2   Checking parameter object properties with constraints
        Assume that the IWebService interface has a method that expects to
        take in a TraceMessage object, which contains specific rules about its
        properties. We could easily check the values of the passed-in TraceMes-
        sage object properties by using the Property-related constraints. This is
        shown in listing 5.12.
        Listing 5.12 Using the Property constraints by using the Property static class

        [Test]
         public void ConstraintsAgainstObjectPropeties()
         {
             MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
             IWebService mockservice = mocks.CreateMock<IWebService>();
             using (mocks.Record())
             {
                 mockservice.LogError(new TraceMessage("",0,""));
                 LastCall.Constraints(
                     Property.Value("Message", "expected msg")         Checks
                  && Property.Value("Severity", 100)                   property
                  && Property.Value("Source", "Some Source"));         values
             }
             mockservice.LogError(new TraceMessage("",1,"Some Source"));
             mocks.VerifyAll();
         }


        Notice the use of the && operators here.
Combining constraints with AND and OR
        The && operators in listing 5.12 are overloaded to use a special And con-
        straint, which requires all of these constraints to be true for the test to
        pass. You could also use the || overload to set a special Or constraint,
        which only requires one of the constraints to be true.
        The And and Or constraints both take two AbstractConstraint objects in
        their constructor. The previous example in listing 5.12 combines two
        And constraints and could have been written as in listing 5.13.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                             Parameter constraints for mocks and stubs   119




       Listing 5.13 Combining constraints with And and Or

       And combined1 =
            new And(
              Property.Value("Message", "expected msg" ),
              Property.Value("Severity", 100));

       And combined2 =
            new And(combined1,
              Property.Value("Source", "Some Source"));

       LastCall.Constraints(combined2);


       As you can see, this sort of syntax can get messy pretty fast, and I don’t
       have much use for it. This is where using a manual stub or a callback
       can make things much clearer, instead of using the And/Or syntax.
Comparing full objects against each other
       If we’re going to test things in the simplest way, we could compare two
       objects. We could send the “expected” object with all the expected
       properties set as part of the recording process (no need for con-
       straints), and then call verify(), as shown in listing 5.14.
       Listing 5.14 Comparing full objects

       [Test]
        public void TestingObjectPropertiesWithObjects()
        {
            MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
            IWebService mockservice = mocks.CreateMock<IWebService>();
            using (mocks.Record())
            {
                mockservice.LogError(
        new TraceMessage("Some Message",100,"Some Source"));
            }
            mockservice.LogError(new TraceMessage("",1,"Some Source"));
            mocks.VerifyAll(); //this should fail the test
        }


       Testing full objects only works for cases where
       ❂ it’s easy to create the object with the expected properties.

       ❂ you want to test all the properties of the object in question.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
120     CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        ❂ you know the exact values of each constraint.
        ❂ the Equals() method is implemented correctly on the two objects

          being compared. (It’s usually bad practice to rely on the out-of-the-
          box implementation of object.Equals().)

5.6.3   Executing callbacks for parameter verification
        The Is.Matching<T>(Predicate<T>) constraint is a powerful feature
        that allows the developer to test whatever he wants against the passed-
        in parameter, and return true or false based on complex rules.
        For example, assume that the IWebService interface has a method that
        expects to take in a TraceMessage object, which in turn has a property
        that holds an object you’d like to check. If we had a ComplexTraceMes-
        sage class with an InnerMessage property and a complex verification on
        it, it might look like listing 5.15.
        Listing 5.15 Using an anonymous delegate to verify a parameter

         LastCall.Constraints(
        Is.Matching<ComplexTraceMessage>(
                  delegate(ComplexTraceMessage msg)
                        {
                               if (msg.InnerMessage.Severity < 50
                                     && msg.InnerMessage.Message.Contains("a"))
                                       {
                                         return false;
                                       }
                                         return true;
                           }));


        In listing 5.15, we’re creating a delegate that holds the logic to verify
        the complex parameter structure.
        Instead of using a delegate, we could create a method with the same
        signature that does the same thing, as shown in listing 5.16.
        Listing 5.16 Using a regular method instead of an anonymous delegate

        [Test]
         public void ComplexConstraintsWithCallbacks()
            {




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                         Testing for event-related activities   121




            ...
            using (mocks.Record())
            {
                mockservice.LogError(new TraceMessage("", 0, ""));
                LastCall.Constraints(

    Is.Matching<ComplexTraceMessage>(verifyComplexMessage));
            }
    ...
        }
        private bool verifyComplexMessage(ComplexTraceMessage msg)
        {
            if (msg.InnerMessage.Severity < 50
                && msg.InnerMessage.Message.Contains("a"))
            {
                return false;
           }
            return true;
        }


    Rhino Mocks has a simpler syntax if you’re only testing a method that
    accepts a single parameter. Instead of using this syntax,
      LastCall.Constraints(
            Is.Matching<ComplexTraceMessage>(verifyComplexMessage));

    you can write this:
      LastCall.Callback(verifyComplexMessage);

    Next, we’ll see how to test whether objects raise events properly, or
    whether other objects have registered for an event properly.

5.7 Testing for event-related activities
    Testing event-related actions has always been one of the gaping holes
    in isolation frameworks and has required manual workarounds to test
    things such as whether an object registered to get an event from
    another object, or whether an object triggered an event when it should
    have. Rhino Mocks has facilities to help in these areas as well.
    The first scenario we’ll tackle is checking whether an object registered
    to receive an event from another object.



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
122     CHAPTER 5      Isolation (mock object) frameworks




5.7.1   Testing that an event has been subscribed to
        Let’s assume we have a Presenter class that needs to register to the
        Load event of a view class it receives. The code for presenter might look
        like listing 5.17.
        Listing 5.17 Testing that an event was registered properly

        public class Presenter
        {
            IView view;
            public Presenter(IView view)
            {
                this.view = view;
                this.view.Load += new EventHandler(view_Load);
            }
                                                                         ?
                                                                         Registers for
                                                                         real event
            void view_Load(object sender, EventArgs e)
            {
                throw new Exception("Not implemented.");
            }
        }

         [Test]
            public void VerifyAttachesToViewEvents()
            {
                MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
                IView viewMock = (IView)mocks.CreateMock(typeof(IView));
                using (mocks.Record())
                {
                    viewMock.Load += null;
                    LastCall.IgnoreArguments();
                                                          w Records  expected
                                                             event registration
                }
                new Presenter(viewMock);
                mocks.VerifyAll();
            }


        During the recording stage, we overload the Load event ?. Then we
        make sure we ignore the arguments in the call, and make sure the call
        happened w.
        Some people find that testing whether an event was subscribed to is
        helpful, but knowing that someone has registered to an event doesn’t



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Testing for event-related activities          123




        mean she did something meaningful with it. It’s not a real functional
        requirement that’s tested here. If I were doing a test review, I’d say
        that this was not needed. Instead, you should test that something hap-
        pened in response to the event being triggered.
        To test this scenario as part of a functional requirement, we could say
        that, upon getting the Load event, the presenter’s production code will
        do something that we can see from our test (write to a log, for exam-
        ple). To get that something to happen, we need to find a way to trigger
        the event from within the stub object and see if the presenter does that
        action in response. That’s what the next section is about.

5.7.2   Triggering events from mocks and stubs
        Listing 5.18 shows a test that makes sure Presenter writes to a log
        upon getting an event from our stub. It also uses a class called Even-
        tRaiser, which triggers the event from the interface.

        Listing 5.18 Triggering an event via the EventRaiser class in Rhino Mocks

         [Test]
          public void TriggerAndVerifyRespondingToEvents()
          {                                                                                Uses stub
              MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();                          ? for event
              IView viewStub = mocks.Stub<IView>();                                        triggering
              IWebService serviceMock =
                  mocks.CreateMock<IWebService>();
              using (mocks.Record())
                                                                             w Uses mock to
                                                                               check log call
              {
                  serviceMock.LogInfo("view loaded");
              }
              new Presenter(viewStub,serviceMock);                              Creates
                                                                                event
                                                                                raiser
               IEventRaiser eventer =
                   EventRaiser.Create(viewStub, "Load");
               eventer.Raise(null,EventArgs.Empty);                          Triggers event

               mocks.Verify(serviceMock);
          }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
124     CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        Another way of getting an EventRaiser object is by using the recording
        mechanism:

        IEventRaiser eventer;
        using (mocks.Record())
           {
              viewStub.Load += null;
              eventer = LastCall.GetEventRaiser();
           }


        Notice in listing 5.18 that we’re using a stub ? to trigger the event, and
        a mock w to check that the service was written to. The EventRaiser
        takes a stub or a mock and the name of the event to raise from that stub
        or mock. The Raise() method of EventRaiser takes a params object[]
        array that requires you to send the number of parameters that the
        event signature requires. The verification of whether the message was
        received happened against the mock service.
        Now, let’s take a look at the opposite end of the testing scenario.
        Instead of testing the subscriber, we’d like to make sure that the event
        source triggers the event at the right time. The next section shows how
        we can do that.

5.7.3   Testing whether an event was triggered
        There are two basic approaches to testing that an event was triggered.
        One is simple, but only works in C#, and the other takes a bit more
        work, but will work in VB.NET. First, let’s look at the simplest
        way—using a handwritten anonymous method.
Testing event firing inline
        A simple way to test the event is by manually registering to it inside the
        test method using an anonymous delegate. Listing 5.19 shows a simple
        example.
        Listing 5.19 Using an anonymous delegate to register to an event

         [Test]
          public void EventFiringManual()
          {
              bool loadFired = false;




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                 Testing for event-related activities   125




                 SomeView view = new SomeView();
                 view.Load+=delegate
                                {
                                     loadFired = true;
                                };
                        view.TriggerLoad(null, EventArgs.Empty);
                 Assert.IsTrue(loadFired);
           }


       The delegate simply records whether the event was fired or not. You
       could also have it record the values, and they could later be asserted as
       well. That code could become quite cumbersome, but most of the time
       it’s quite a workable solution, and I recommend it if you use C#. Unfor-
       tunately, this won’t work in VB.NET because VB.NET currently
       doesn’t support inline anonymous delegates that don’t return a value.
       (It does support nonvoid anonymous delegates and will support the
       void ones in version 10.)
       With VB.NET, the solution requires a bit more work. You need to
       send in the address of a full method in the class, and have that method
       set a class scope variable flag telling our test whether the event was
       fired or not. It’s not as clean as I’d like, but it works.
       The next section shows a less cumbersome way to test the event trig-
       gering and the values that are passed in if we can’t use anonymous del-
       egates.
Using EventsVerifier for event testing
       Another approach is to use a class called EventsVerifier (not part of
       Rhino Mocks), which will dynamically register against the required
       delegate and verify the values that are passed in by the fired event.
       EventsVerifier can be downloaded from http://weblogs.asp.net/
       rosherove/archive/2005/06/13/EventsVerifier.aspx. Listing 5.20 shows
       an example of its use.
       Listing 5.20 Using the EventsVerifier class to test for event values

       [Test]
        public void EventFiringWithEventsVerifier()
        {




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
126   CHAPTER 5   Isolation (mock object) frameworks




           EventsVerifier verifier = new EventsVerifier();
           SomeView view = new SomeView();
           verifier.Expect(view, "Load",null,EventArgs.Empty);

           view.TriggerLoad(null, EventArgs.Empty);

           verifier.Verify();
       }


      This test assumes we have a class that implements IView, and that the
      class has a method that triggers the event. The verifier takes the object
      to test against, the name of the event, and any parameter values that
      are passed in as part of the event signature. Rhino Mocks currently
      doesn’t have a decent enough API to test event verification the way
      EventsVerifier does.

      We’ve covered the basic techniques with Rhino Mocks, so let’s look at
      a different syntax that it supports: arrange-act-assert.

 5.8 Arrange-act-assert syntax for isolation
      The record-and-replay model for setting expectations on stubs and
      mocks has always been a polarizing feature. Some people found it easy
      to grasp, and some people found it unnatural and cumbersome to write.
      It also makes tests less readable if you have lots of stubs and expecta-
      tions in a single test.
      The Moq framework changed the landscape in the .NET isolation
      arena by offering a simplified and concise syntax for setting expecta-
      tions. Rhino Mocks and Typemock Isolator soon followed.
      The idea is based on the way we structure our unit tests today: we
      arrange objects, act on them, and assert that something is true or false
      (arrange-act-assert, or AAA). It would be nice if we could use isolation
      frameworks similarly—to arrange mocks and stubs, set their default
      behavior, and, only at the end of the test, verify whether a call to the
      mock object took place.
      Listing 5.21 shows a simple test with the record-and-replay syntax, fol-
      lowed by the same test in AAA-style syntax using Typemock Isolator
      and Rhino Mocks.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                       Arrange-act-assert syntax for isolation        127




Listing 5.21 Record-and-replay versus AAA-style isolation

[Test]
 public void CreateMock_WithReplayAll()
 {
      MockRepository mockEngine = new MockRepository();
      IWebService simulatedService =
   mockEngine.DynamicMock<IWebService>();
      using (mockEngine.Record())
      {
         simulatedService.LogError("Filename too short:abc.ext");
      }
      LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);
      string tooShortFileName = "abc.ext";
      log.Analyze(tooShortFileName);

      mockEngine.Verify(simulatedService);
 }

 //the same test using AAA syntax
[Test]
 public void CreateMock_WithReplayAll_AAA()
 {
      MockRepository mockEngine = new MockRepository();
      IWebService simulatedService =
   mockEngine.DynamicMock<IWebService>();
      LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);

      mockEngine.ReplayAll();                               Moves to
      log.Analyze("abc.ext");                               act mode

      simulatedService.AssertWasCalled(                                   Asserts using
         svc => svc.LogError("name too short:abc.ext"));                  Rhino Mocks
 }
  //the same test using Typemock Isolator AAA syntax
[Test]
 public void CreateMock_Isolator()
 {
      IWebService simulatedService =
   Isolate.Fake.Instance<IWebService>();
      LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);
      log.Analyze("abc.ext");




       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
128   CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




       Isolate.Verify.WasCalledWithExactArguments(()=>
            simulatedService                                        Asserts using
                                                                    Typemock Isolator
              .LogError("name too short:abs.ext"));
      }




        Setting up Typemock Isolator
        To use Typemock Isolator, you’ll need to first download it from
        Typemock.com and install it. It’s a commercial product with a 21-day
        (extendable) evaluation period. Unlike the other frameworks, you can’t
        just reference a DLL and start using it. It requires a Visual Studio plugin
        to work, and a special runner to run tests in command-line mode.

        To add a reference to Typemock, right-click on the test project in Solu-
        tion Explorer, and select Add Reference. From there, go to the .NET tab
        and select both “Typemock Isolator” and “Typemock Isolator—C#” or
        “Typemock Isolator—VB”. (The product has a special VB-friendly API that
        solves some VB-specific issues with regard to anonymous delegate usage.)



      The main difference between the record-and-replay model and the
      AAA model is that in AAA we don’t need to record what we expect will
      happen. We just need to check at the end of the test that something did
      happen correctly. This makes the test more readable, but you’ll also
      notice the use of .NET 3.5 lambda syntax in the AAA-style tests. This
      is an essential part of these new APIs and what makes these syntax
      changes technically possible.
      If you’re not comfortable using lambdas yet, you might be better off
      using the record-and-replay style until you get used to lambdas, and
      they’re not an obstacle to understanding the code.
      Listing 5.22 shows how you’d use AAA-style stubs with Rhino Mocks
      and Typemock Isolator.
      Listing 5.22 Stubs in AAA-style isolation

      [Test]
       public void StubThatThrowsException_RhinoMocks()
       {




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                  Arrange-act-assert syntax for isolation        129




       IWebService simulatedService =
    MockRepository.GenerateStub<IWebService>();                      Uses
       simulatedService                                         ? extension
           .Expect(t => t.LogError(""))                              methods
           .Throw(new Exception("fake exception"))
           .Constraints(Is.Anything());                         w Throws  fake
                                                                  exception

      LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);
      log.Analyze("abc.ext");
}

[Test]
 public void StubThatThrowsException_Isolator()
 {
     IWebService simulatedService =                          Provides
   Isolate.Fake.Instance<IWebService>();                 e single point
     Isolate                                                 of entry to API
 .WhenCalled(()=>simulatedService.LogError(""))
                                                                   Throws fake
 .WillThrow(new Exception("fake exception"));                  w exception
      LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(simulatedService);
      log.Analyze("abc.ext");
}



These tests will fail because we’re throwing a fake exception w from
the web service stub. The Expect() method that magically appears on
the IWebService interface ? when using Rhino Mocks is due to exten-
sion methods that are used in .NET 3.5. With Typemock Isolator,
there’s a single point of entry to the API e, so no extension methods
are necessary.
Personally, I find that the AAA syntax for Typemock Isolator is more
readable than in Rhino Mocks. There are many other facets to the new
AAA syntax. You can learn more about it at the websites for the vari-
ous frameworks.
It’s now time to compare Rhino Mocks to other isolation frameworks
in the .NET world.




       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
130     CHAPTER 5   Isolation (mock object) frameworks




 5.9 Current isolation frameworks for .NET
        Rhino Mocks is certainly not the only isolation framework around. But
        in an informal poll held March 2009, I asked my blog readers, “Which
        isolation framework do you use?” Close to 46 percent of the more than
        600 people who responded reported using Rhino Mocks, 20 percent
        were using Moq, and 7 percent were using Typemock. (See figure 5.2.)




                                                             Figure 5.2 Usage
                                                             of isolation
                                                             frameworks among
                                                             my blog readers

        What follows is a short review of the current isolation frameworks in
        .NET. It’s usually a good idea to pick one and stick with it as much as
        possible, for the sake of readability and to lower the learning curve for
        team members. The information that follows should help you make a
        choice, but note that each of the frameworks mentioned (especially the
        top three) can add new features at an alarming pace, so the choice of
        what’s best for your team will seem to be in a constant state of flux.

5.9.1   NUnit.Mocks
        NUnit.Mocks is an internal side project of the NUnit framework. It
        was originally created to provide a simple, lightweight isolation frame-
        work that could be used to test NUnit itself, without having to rely on


              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                            Current isolation frameworks for .NET   131




        external libraries and version dependencies. Part of NUnit is open
        source, but it was never regarded as public, so there’s little or no docu-
        mentation about using it on the web today. Charlie Poole, the current
        maintainer of NUnit, has said that he is considering either removing it
        completely from the distribution of NUnit or making it public in ver-
        sion 3.0 of NUnit.
        Here are a few of the limitations of NUnit.Mocks:
        ❂ It doesn’t support stub syntax.
        ❂ It requires strings to expect calls on method names.

        ❂ It has no support for testing or firing events.

        ❂ It doesn’t support parameter constraints (expected parameter values

          that are hardcoded in the test).

5.9.2   NMock
        NMock is a port of the jMock framework from the Java language. As
        such, it has been around quite a long time and has many users. It has
        been largely unmaintained since early 2008 because the developers
        have gone to work on something bigger and better: NMock2. NMock
        is open source.
        NMock supports the stub syntax but still requires strings for method
        name expectations. It has no event-raise or test support, but it does
        support parameter constraints.

5.9.3   NMock2
        NMock2 is a large leap forward from NMock. The APIs have changed
        greatly to accommodate a more fluent calling interface. NMock2,
        unfortunately, at the time of this writing, has been largely unmain-
        tained since early 2008 and has only come back into some sort of
        update cycle in 2009, which has driven many people away from using
        it. NMock2 is open source.
        NMock2 supports most, if not all, of the features that Rhino Mocks has,
        with the main difference being that method expectations are string-
        based in NMock2, whereas in Rhino Mocks they’re call-based. (You



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
132     CHAPTER 5    Isolation (mock object) frameworks




        call the method as part of the recording process.) NMock2 also features
        parameter constraints, event-related assertions, and callback abilities.

5.9.4   Typemock Isolator
        Typemock Isolator is a commercial isolation framework, although
        there’s a free edition with the same features for use in open source proj-
        ect development. Because it’s commercial, it also has good documenta-
        tion that’s always up to date, a support program, and continually
        updated versions. Isolator is a perfect fit for testing not only new code
        but also legacy code (untested, existing code) where testing can be
        impossible in many situations.
        Typemock Isolator builds on top of the abilities of the other frame-
        works, and it also allows mock (called “fake” in the Isolator API)
        classes that have private constructors, static methods, and much more.
        It does this by attaching to the .NET profiler APIs—a set of APIs that
        allow you to intercept a call to anything, anywhere, including private
        members, statics, and events. Anything that goes on in the .NET run-
        time can be intercepted. Typemock Isolator has raised quite a stir in
        the unit-testing and isolation world of .NET. Some people claim that it
        may be too powerful, because it makes it easy to simulate and break the
        dependencies of any object in your existing code. In that way, it doesn’t
        force you to think about how your design might need to change.
        Others feel that it provides a sort of bridge for getting started with test-
        ing even if the design is untestable, allowing you to learn better design
        as you go, instead of having to refactor and learn better design skills
        before testing. If you can’t mock an object in your code, it can mean
        that the design could be improved to be more decoupled. That’s why
        many people like to use their tests to flush out design problems. Appen-
        dix A discusses this issue.

5.9.5   Rhino Mocks
        Rhino Mocks was first released in June 2005, and has gained a massive
        user base already. It’s open source, is continuously being worked upon,
        and has frequent releases. Currently, it’s maintained by a single devel-
        oper (who seems to have no life whatsoever). It has powerful APIs,



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Current isolation frameworks for .NET           133




and one of the things it’s most noted for is avoiding the use of strings
inside tests. To understand why strings in tests are bad, see the sidebar.

  Why method strings are bad inside tests
  The best way to explain this is to look at an example of using
  NUnit.Mocks and Rhino Mocks to do the same thing. We’ll see the differ-
  ences in using strings for method names and using the isolation frame-
  work syntax.

  We’ll mock the following interface:
  interface ILogger
  {
  void LogError(string msg, int level, string location);
  }

  First, we’ll look at how we’d mock this interface using NUnit.Mocks:
  //Using NUnit.Mocks
  DynamicMock mock = new DynamicMock(typeof(ILogger));
  mock.Expect("LogError",
  "param value 1 is string",                ? Uses a string
  2,
  "param value 3 is a string as well");
  ILogger myMockInterface = mock.MockInstance as ILogger;
  MytestedClass.SetLogger(myMockInterface);

  The Rhino Mocks code looks different:
  //Using Rhino.Mocks
  MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
  ILogger simulatedLogger = mocks.StrictMock<ILogger>();

  simulatedLogger.LogError("param value 1 is a string", 2,                 Uses
  "param value 3 is a string");                                        w a strongly
  mocks.ReplayAll();                                                       typed call

   MyTestedClass.SetLogger(simulatedLogger);
  MyTestedClass.DoSomething();
  mocks.VerifyAll();

  Notice how lines ? and w are different in these two versions. If we were
  to change the name of the LogError method on the ILogger interface,
  any tests using NUnit would still compile and would only break at run-
  time, throwing an exception indicating that a method named LogError
  could not be found.




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
134     CHAPTER 5     Isolation (mock object) frameworks




            With Rhino Mocks, changing the name would not be a problem, because
            we’re invoking the method API as part of our recording stage. Any meth-
            od changes would keep the test from compiling, and we’d know imme-
            diately that there was a problem with the test.

            With automated refactoring tools like those in Visual Studio 2005 and
            2008, renaming a method is easier, but most refactorings will still ig-
            nore strings in the source code. (ReSharper for .NET is an exception. It
            also corrects strings, but that’s only a partial solution that may prove
            problematic in some scenarios.)


5.9.6   Moq
        Moq is a relatively new framework. It requires using .NET 3.5 because
        it uses lambda constructs to work its magic. It’s simple to use if you’re
        comfortable with lambda syntax, but it will only work on interface
        types and classes that are nonsealed with virtual methods. Unlike
        Rhino Mocks, it does allow you to fake protected methods.
        Let’s recap the advantages of using isolation frameworks over hand-
        written mocks. Then we’ll discuss things to watch out for when using
        isolation frameworks.

 5.10 Advantages of isolation frameworks
        From what we’ve covered in this chapter, we can see some distinct
        advantages to using isolation frameworks:
        ❂   Easier parameter verification—Using handwritten mocks to test that a
          method was given the correct parameter values can be a tedious pro-
          cess, requiring time and patience. Most isolation frameworks make
          checking the values of parameters passed into methods a trivial pro-
          cess even if there are many parameters.
        ❂ Easier verification of multiple method calls—With manually written mocks,

          it can be difficult to check that multiple method calls on the same
          method were made correctly with each having appropriate different
          parameter values. As we’ll see later, this is a trivial process with iso-
          lation frameworks.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                      Traps to avoid when using isolation frameworks   135




      ❂   Easier fakes creation—Isolation frameworks can be used for creating
          both mocks and stubs more easily.

      NOTE      When we create mock objects, we establish expectations as to what
                calls will be made against our mock object, and we define any return
                values necessary. With isolation frameworks, an expectation is an
                essential part of the work process, and it’s an integral part of the iso-
                lation syntax. This makes it far easier to write multiple expectations
                on a mock instance while keeping the test readable.


 5.11 Traps to avoid when using isolation frameworks
      Although there are many advantages to using isolation frameworks,
      there are some possible dangers too. Some examples are overusing an
      isolation framework when a manual mock object would suffice, making
      tests unreadable because of overusing mocks in a test, or not separating
      tests well enough.
      Here’s a simple list of things to watch out for:
      ❂ Unreadable test code
      ❂ Verifying the wrong things

      ❂ Having more than one mock per test

      ❂ Overspecifying the tests


      Let’s look at each of these in more depth.

5.11.1 Unreadable test code
      Using a mock in a test already makes the test a little less readable, but
      still readable enough that an outsider can look at it and understand
      what’s going on. Having many mocks, or many expectations, in a single
      test can ruin the readability of the test so it’s hard to maintain or even
      to understand what’s being tested.
      If you find that your test becomes unreadable or hard to follow, con-
      sider removing some mocks or some mock expectations, or separating
      the test into several smaller tests that are more readable.




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
136   CHAPTER 5      Isolation (mock object) frameworks




5.11.2 Verifying the wrong things
      Mock objects allow us to verify that methods were called on our inter-
      faces, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that we’re testing the right thing.
      Testing that an object subscribed to an event doesn’t tell us anything
      about the functionality of that object. Testing that when the event is
      raised something meaningful happens is a better way to test that object.

5.11.3 Having more than one mock per test
      It’s considered good practice to only test one thing per test. Testing
      more than one thing can lead to confusion and problems maintaining
      the test. Having two mocks in a test is the same as testing several
      things. If you can’t name your test because it does too many things, it’s
      time to separate it into more than one test.

5.11.4 Overspecifying the tests
      If your test has too many expectations, you may create a test that
      breaks down with even the lightest of code changes, even though the
      overall functionality still works. Consider this a more technical way of
      not verifying the right things. Testing interactions is a double-edged
      sword: test it too much, and you start to lose sight of the big pic-
      ture—the overall functionality; test it too little, and you’ll miss the
      important interactions between objects.
      Here are some ways to balance this effect:
      ❂   Use nonstrict mocks when you can.
          The test will break less often because of unexpected method calls.
          This helps when the private methods in the production code keep
          changing.
      ❂   Use stubs instead of mocks when you can.
          You only need to test one scenario at a time. The more mocks you
          have, the more verifications will take place at the end of the test, but
          only one of them will usually be the important one. The rest will be
          noise against the current test scenario.
      ❂   Avoid using stubs as mocks.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                             Summary       137




       Use a stub only for faking return values into the program under test,
       or to throw exceptions. Don’t verify that methods were called on
       stubs. Use a mock only for verifying that some method was called on
       it, but don’t use it to return values into your program under test. If
       you can’t avoid this situation, you should probably be using a stub
       and testing something other than what the mock object receives.
   ❂   Don’t repeat logic in your tests.
       If you’re asserting that some calculation is correct in your code,
       make sure your test doesn’t repeat the calculation in the test code, or
       the bug might be duplicated and the test will magically pass.
   ❂   Don’t use “magic” values.
       Try to always use hardcoded, known return values to assert against
       production code, and don’t create expected values dynamically. That
       would significantly increase the chances for an unreadable test or a
       bug in the test.
   Overspecification is a common form of test abuse. Make sure you keep
   your eyes on this by doing frequent test reviews with your peers.


5.12 Summary
   Dynamic mock objects are pretty cool, and you should learn to use
   them at will. But it’s important to lean toward state-based testing (as
   opposed to interaction testing) whenever you can, so that your tests
   assume as little as possible about internal implementation details.
   Mocks should be used only when there’s no other way to test the
   implementation, because they eventually lead to tests that are harder to
   maintain if you’re not careful.
   Learn how to use the advanced features of an isolation framework such
   as Rhino Mocks or Typemock Isolator, and you can pretty much make
   sure that anything happens or doesn’t happen in your tests. All you
   need is for your code to be testable.
   You can also shoot yourself in the foot by creating overspecified tests
   that aren’t readable or will likely break. The art lies in knowing when



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
138   CHAPTER 5   Isolation (mock object) frameworks




      to use dynamic versus handwritten mocks. My guideline is that, when
      the code using the isolation framework starts to look ugly, it’s a sign
      that you may want to simplify things. Use a handwritten mock, or
      change your test to test a different result that proves your point but is
      easier to test.
      When all else fails and your code is hard to test, you have three choices:
      use a “super” framework like Typemock Isolator, change the design, or
      quit your job.
      Isolation frameworks can help make your testing life much easier and
      your tests more readable and maintainable. But it’s also important to
      know when they might hinder your development more than they help.
      In legacy situations, for example, you might want to consider using a
      different framework based on its abilities. It’s all about picking the
      right tool for the job, so be sure to look at the big picture when consid-
      ering how to approach a specific problem in testing.
      That’s it! We’ve covered the core techniques for writing unit tests. The
      next part of the book deals with managing test code, arranging tests,
      and patterns for tests that you can rely on, maintain easily, and under-
      stand clearly.




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                Part 3

                                         The test code

    his part of the book covers techniques for managing and organizing

T   unit tests and for ensuring that the quality of unit tests in real-world
    projects is high.
    Chapter 6 first covers the role of unit testing as part of an automated
    build process, and follows with several techniques for organizing the
    different kinds of tests according to categories (speed, type) with a goal
    of reaching what I call the “safe green zone.” It also explains how to
    “grow” a test API or test infrastructure for your application.
    In chapter 7, we’ll take a look at the three basic pillars of good unit
    tests—readability, maintainability, and trustworthiness—and look at
    techniques to support them. If you only read one chapter in the book,
    this should be it.




          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
6

Test hierarchies and
organization
    This chapter covers
           • Running unit tests during automated nightly builds
           • Using continuous integration for automated builds
           • Organizing tests in a solution
           • Exploring test class inheritance patterns




    nit tests are as important to an application as the production source code.

U   As with the regular code, you need to give careful thought to where the
    tests reside, both physically and logically, in relation to the code under
    test. If you put the tests in the wrong place, the tests you’ve written so
    carefully may not be run.
    Similarly, if you don’t devise ways to reuse parts of your tests, create util-
    ity methods for testing, or use test hierarchies, you’ll end up with test
    code that’s either unmaintainable or hard to understand.
    This chapter addresses these issues with patterns and guidelines that will
    help you shape the way your tests look, feel, and run, and will affect how
    well they play with the rest of your code and with other tests.
    Where the tests are located depends on where they will be used and who
    will run them. There are two common scenarios: tests run as part of the
    automated build process, and tests run locally by developers on their own

                                         141



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
142     CHAPTER 6    Test hierarchies and organization




        machines. The automated build process is very important, and that’s
        what we’ll focus on.

 6.1 Having automated builds run automated tests
        The power of the automated build cannot and should not be ignored. If
        you plan to make your team more agile and equipped to handle
        requirement changes as they come into your shop, you need to be able
        to do the following:
        1   Make a small change to your code.
        2   Run all the tests to make sure you haven’t broken any existing func-
            tionality.
        3   Make sure your code can still integrate well and not break any other
            projects you depend upon.
        Running those tests lets you know whether you’ve broken any existing
        or new functionality. Integrating your code with the other projects will
        indicate whether or not you broke the compilation of the code or things
        that are logically dependent on your code.
        Integrating your code usually means doing the following:
        1   Getting the latest version of everyone’s source code from the source
            control repository
        2   Trying to compile it all locally
        3   Running all tests locally
        4   Fixing anything that has been broken
        5   Checking in your source code
        An automated build process combines all these steps under a special
        build script that will make sure all these things are done without
        human interaction. If anything breaks in the process, the build server
        will notify the relevant parties of a build break.
6.1.1   Anatomy of an automated build
        An automated build process should perform at least the bold points in
        the following list, but it may include many other things:
        ❂ Get the latest version of all projects in question.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                             Having automated builds run automated tests   143




❂ Compile all the projects in their latest version.
❂ Deploy build output to a test server.

❂ Run tests locally or on the test server.

❂ Create an archive of build outputs based on date and build number.

❂ Deploy outputs to staging or even production server.

❂ Configure and install components on target server.

❂ Notify relevant people (by email) if any of the steps failed.

❂ Merge databases.

❂ Create reports on build quality, history, and test statuses.

❂ Create tasks or work items automatically (such as adding a Team

  System work item) if specific tasks have failed.
The easiest way to get an automated build going is by creating a build
process and scripts as soon as the project is started. It’s much easier to
create an automated build for a small project and keep adding to it as
the project grows than it is to start later in the game.
There are many tools that can help you create an automated build sys-
tem. Some are free or open source, and some are commercial. Here are
a few tools you can look at:
❂ CruiseControl.NET (cruisecontrol.sourceforge.net)
❂ TeamCity (JetBrains.com)

❂ NAnt (nant.sourceforge.net)

❂ MSBuild

  (http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/wea2sca5(VS.80).aspx)
❂ FinalBuilder (www.FinalBuilder.com)

❂ Visual Build Pro (www.kinook.com)

❂ Visual Studio Team Foundation Server (http://msdn.microsoft.com/

  en-us/teamsystem/default.aspx)
These are all configuration-based programs that allow you to create a
series of steps that will be run in a hierarchy structure. You can create
custom commands to be run, and you can schedule these builds to run
automatically.



      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
144     CHAPTER 6   Test hierarchies and organization




6.1.2   Triggering builds and continuous integration
        The term continuous integration is literally about making the automated
        build and integration process run continuously. For example, you
        could have the build run every time someone checks in source code to
        the system, or every 45 minutes.
        One popular continuous integration tool is CruiseControl.NET. It’s
        fully open source and supports both the idea of tasks, which are individ-
        ual commands that are run during a build, and the concept of triggers,
        which can start a build automatically when certain events occur, such
        as source control updates.
        Among the commercial tools, Visual Studio Team System 2008 sup-
        ports automated builds and continuous integration out of the box. If
        that’s a bit beyond your budget, look at FinalBuilder and Visual Build
        Pro. These two commercial and highly successful build tools allow
        visual editing and maintenance of automated build projects. That
        means easier maintenance of the build file, which can get pretty scary
        for larger projects.
6.1.3   Automated build types
        You can configure many types of automated builds to produce differ-
        ent results or builds that run in specific amounts of time (all of which
        compile the code first, though). Here are a few examples:
        ❂ A nightly build
          • runs all the long-running tests.
          • runs system tests.
        ❂ A release build

          • runs the nightly build.
          • deploys to server and archives.
        ❂ A CI (continuous integration) build

          • runs all the fast-running tests.
          • finishes in less than 10 minutes.

        When you start writing tests, you should categorize them by their run-
        ning times:
        ❂ Fast-running tests

        ❂ Slow-running tests




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                         Mapping out tests based on speed and type   145




       Integration tests generally run slower than unit tests, which usually
       happen in memory, so the fast-running tests are usually unit tests and
       the slow-running tests are usually integration tests.
       Automated builds usually fall into two categories: those that are too
       long to run every 15 minutes, and those that can be run every 15 min-
       utes or less. Once you’ve categorized the tests, you can set the short
       and quick builds that run continuously to run a subset of the tests—the
       quick ones. If you can afford it, it’s much better to run all the tests. But
       if your tests really slow down a build, running a subset of quick tests is
       the next best thing.

 6.2 Mapping out tests based on speed and type
       It’s easy to run the tests to check their run times and to determine
       which are integration tests and which are unit tests. Once you do, put
       them in separate places. They don’t need to be in separate test projects;
       a separate folder and namespace should be enough.
       Figure 6.1 shows a simple folder structure you can use inside your
       Visual Studio projects.
       Some companies, based on the build software and unit-testing frame-
       work they use, find it easier to use separate test projects for unit and
       integration tests. This makes it easier to use command-line tools that




Figure 6.1 Integration tests and unit tests
can reside in different folders and
namespaces but remain under the same
project. Base classes have their own folders.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
146     CHAPTER 6   Test hierarchies and organization




                                                 Figure 6.2 The unit-testing and integra-
                                                 tion projects are unique for the LogAn
                                                 project and have different namespaces.


        accept and run a full test assembly containing only specific kinds of
        tests. Figure 6.2 shows how you’d set up two separate kinds of test
        projects under a single solution.
        Even if you haven’t already implemented an automated build system,
        separating unit from integration tests is a good idea. Mixing up the two
        tests can lead to severe consequences, such as people not running your
        tests, as we’ll see next.

6.2.1   The human factor of separating unit from integration tests
        I recommend separating unit from integration tests. If you don’t,
        there’s a big risk people won’t run the tests often enough. If the tests
        exist, why wouldn’t people run them as often as needed? One reason is
        that developers can be lazy.
        If a developer gets the latest version of the source code and finds that
        some unit tests fail, there are several possible causes:
        ❂ There’s a bug in the code under test.
        ❂ The test has a problem in the way it’s written.

        ❂ The test is no longer relevant.

        ❂ The test requires some configuration to run.


        All but the last point are valid reasons for a developer to stop and
        investigate the code. The last one isn’t a development issue; it’s a con-
        figuration problem, which is often considered less important because it
        gets in the way of running the tests. If such a test fails, the developer
        will often ignore the test failure and go on to other things. (He has
        “more important” things to do.)
        In many ways, having such “hidden” integration tests mixed in with
        unit tests and scattered around your test project with unknown or unex-
        pected configuration requirements (like a database connection) is bad
        form. These tests are less approachable, they waste time and money on


              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Mapping out tests based on speed and type   147




        finding problems that aren’t there, and they generally discourage the
        developer from trusting the set of tests again. Like bad apples in a
        bunch, they make all the others look bad. The next time something sim-
        ilar happens, the developer may not even look for a cause for the failure,
        and may simply say, “Oh, that test sometimes fails; it’s OK.”
        To make sure this doesn’t happen, you can create a safe green zone.

6.2.2   The safe green zone
        Separate your integration and unit tests into separate places. By doing
        that, you give the developers on your team a safe green test area that only
        contains unit tests, where they know that they can get the latest code
        version, they can run all tests in that namespace or folder, and they
        should all be green. If some tests in the safe green zone don’t pass, there’s
        a real problem, not a (false positive) configuration problem in the test.
        This doesn’t mean that the integration tests shouldn’t all be passing.
        But because integration tests inherently take longer to execute, it’s
        more likely that developers will run the unit tests more times a day and
        run the integration tests fewer, but still hopefully at least during the
        nightly build. Developers can focus on being productive and getting at
        least a partial sense of confidence when all their unit tests are passing.
        The nightly build should have all the configuration needed to make the
        integration tests pass.
        In addition, creating a separate integration zone (the opposite of a safe
        green zone) for the integration tests gives you not only a place to quaran-
        tine tests that may run slowly, but also a place to put documents detail-
        ing what configuration needs to take place to make all these tests work.
        An automated build system will do all that configuration work for you.
        However, if you want to run locally, you should have in your solution
        or project an integration zone that has all the information you need to
        make things run but that you can also skip if you want to just run the
        quick tests (in the safe green zone).
        But none of this matters if you don’t have your tests inside the source
        control tree, as we’ll see next.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
148     CHAPTER 6    Test hierarchies and organization




 6.3 Ensuring tests are part of source control
        Tests must be part of source control. The test code that you write needs
        to reside in a source control repository, just like your real production
        code. In fact, you should treat your test code as thoughtfully as you
        treat your production code. It should be part of the branch for each
        version of the product, and it should be part of the code that developers
        get automatically when they get the latest version.
        Because unit tests are so connected to the code and API, they should
        always stay attached to the version of the code they’re testing. Getting
        version 1.0.1 of your product will also get version 1.0.1 of the tests for
        your product; version 1.0.2 of your product and its tests will be different.
        Also, having your tests as part of the source control tree is what allows
        your automated build processes to make sure they run the correct ver-
        sion of the tests against your software.

 6.4 Mapping test classes to code under test
        When you create test classes, the way they’re structured and placed
        should allow you to easily do the following:
        ❂ Look at a project and find all the tests that relate to it.
        ❂ Look at a class and find all the tests that relate to it.

        ❂ Look at a method and find all the tests that relate to it.

        There are several patterns that can help you do this. We’ll go through
        these points one by one.

6.4.1   Mapping tests to projects
        Create a project to contain the tests, and give it the same name as the
        project under test, adding [.Tests] to the end of the name. For exam-
        ple, if I had a project named Osherove.MyLibrary, I would also have a
        test project named Osherove.MyLibrary.Tests.Unit as well as
        Osherove.MyLibrary.Tests.Integration. (See figure 6.2, earlier in this
        chapter, for an example.) This may sound crude, but it’s easy, and it
        allows a developer to find all the tests for a specific project.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                           Mapping test classes to code under test   149




        You may also want to use Visual Studio’s ability to create folders under
        the solution, and group this threesome into its own folder, but that’s a
        matter of taste.

6.4.2   Mapping tests to classes
        There are several ways to go about mapping the tests for a class you’re
        testing. We’ll look at two main scenarios: having one test class for each
        class under test and having separate test classes for complex methods
        being tested.
        TIP   These are the two test class patterns I use most, but others exist. I sug-
              gest you look at Gerard Meszaros’ xUnit Test Patterns book for more.

One test class per class under test
        You want to be able to quickly locate all tests for a specific class, and
        the solution is much like the previous pattern for projects: take the
        name of the class you want to write tests for and, in the test project,
        create a test class with the same name postfixed with “Tests”. For a
        class called LogAnalyzer, you’d create a test class in your test project
        named LogAnalyzerTests.
        Note the plural; this is a class that holds multiple tests for the class
        under test, not just one test. It’s important to be accurate. Readability
        and language matter a lot when it comes to test code, and once you
        start cutting corners in one place, you’ll be doing so in others, which
        can lead to problems.
        The one-test-class-per-class pattern (also mentioned in Meszaros’ xUnit
        Test Patterns book) is the simplest and most common pattern for organiz-
        ing tests. You put all the tests for all methods of the class under test in
        one big test class. When using this pattern, some methods in the class
        under test may have so many tests that the test class becomes much less
        readable or browsable. Sometimes the tests for one method drown out
        the other tests for other methods. That in itself could indicate that
        maybe the method is doing too much.
        TIP   Test readability is important. You’re writing tests as much for the per-
              son who will read them as for the computer that will run them.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
150     CHAPTER 6    Test hierarchies and organization




        If the person reading the test has to spend more time browsing the test
        code than understanding it, the test will cause maintenance headaches
        as the code gets bigger and bigger. That’s why you might think about
        doing it differently.
One test class per feature
        An alternative is creating a separate test class for a particular feature
        (which could be as small as a method). The one-test-class-per-feature pat-
        tern is also mentioned in Meszaros’ xUnit Test Patterns book. If you seem
        to have lots of test methods that make your test class difficult to read,
        find the method or group of methods whose tests are drowning out the
        other tests for that class, and create a separate test class for it, with the
        name relating to the feature.
        For example, suppose a class named LoginManager has a ChangePass-
        word method you’d like to test, but it has so many test cases that you
        want to put it in a separate test class. You might end up with two test
        classes: LoginManagerTests, which contains all the other tests; and Log-
        inManagerTestsChangePassword, which contains only the tests for the
        ChangePassword method.


6.4.3   Mapping tests to specific methods
        Beyond making test names readable and understandable, our main
        goal is to be able to easily find all test methods for a specific method
        under test, so we should give our test methods meaningful names. We
        can use the method name as part of the test name.
        We could name a test ChangePassword_scenario_expectedbehavior. This
        naming convention is discussed in chapter 2 (section 2.3.2).

 6.5 Building a test API for your application
        Sooner or later, as you start writing tests for your applications,
        you’re bound to refactor them, and create utility methods, utility
        classes, and many other constructs (either in the test projects or in
        the code under test) solely for the purpose of testability or test read-
        ability and maintenance.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                            Building a test API for your application   151




        Here are some things you may find you want to do:
        ❂ Use inheritance in your test classes for code reuse, guidance, and
          more.
        ❂ Create test utility classes and methods.

        ❂ Make your API known to developers.

        Let’s look at these in turn.

6.5.1   Using test class inheritance patterns
        One of the most powerful arguments for object-oriented code is that
        you can reuse existing functionality instead of recreating it over and
        over again in other classes—what Andy Hunt and Dave Thomas called
        the DRY (“don’t repeat yourself”) principle in The Pragmatic Programmer.
        Because the unit tests you write in .NET and most object-oriented lan-
        guages are in an object-oriented paradigm, it’s not a crime to use inher-
        itance in the test classes themselves. In fact, I urge you to do this if you
        have a good reason to. Implementing a base class can help alleviate
        standard problems in test code by
        ❂ reusing utility and factory methods.
        ❂ running the same set of tests over different classes. (We’ll look at this

          one in more detail.)
        ❂ using common setup or teardown code (also useful for integration

          testing).
        ❂ creating testing guidance for programmers who will derive from the

          base class.
        I’ll introduce you to three patterns based on test class inheritance, each
        one building on the previous pattern. I’ll also explain when you might
        want to use each of them and what the pros and cons are for each of
        them.
        These are the basic three patterns:
        ❂ Abstract test infrastructure class
        ❂ Template test class

        ❂ Abstract test driver class




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
152    CHAPTER 6      Test hierarchies and organization




       We’ll also take a look at the following refactoring techniques that you
       can apply when using the preceding patterns:
       ❂ Refactoring into a class hierarchy
       ❂ Using generics

Abstract test infrastructure class pattern
       The abstract test infrastructure class pattern creates an abstract test class that
       contains essential common infrastructure for test classes deriving from
       it. Scenarios where you’d want to create such a base class can range
       from having common setup and teardown code to having special cus-
       tom asserts that are used throughout multiple test classes.
       We’ll look at an example that will allow us to reuse a setup method in
       two test classes. Here’s the scenario: all tests need to override the
       default logger implementation in the application so that logging is done
       in memory instead of in a file (that is, all tests need to break the logger
       dependency in order to run correctly).
       Listing 6.1 shows these classes:
       ❂   The LogAnalyzer class and method—The class and method we’d like to test
       ❂ The LoggingFacility class—The class that holds the logger implemen-
         tation we’d like to override in our tests
       ❂ The ConfigurationManager class—Another user of LoggingFacility,

         which we’ll test later
       ❂ The LogAnalyzerTests class and method—The initial test class and

         method we’re going to write
       ❂ The StubLogger class—An internal class that will replace the real log-

         ger implementation
       ❂ The ConfigurationManagerTests class—A class that holds tests for Con-

           figurationManager

       Listing 6.1 An example of not following the DRY principle in test classes

       //This class uses the LoggingFacility Internally
       public class LogAnalyzer
           {
               public void Analyze(string fileName)
               {
                   if (fileName.Length < 8)


              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                   Building a test API for your application   153




              {
                  LoggingFacility.Log("Filename too short:" + fileName);
              }
              //rest of the method here
          }
    }

//another class that uses the LoggingFacility internally
public class ConfigurationManager
    {
        public bool IsConfigured(string configName)
        {
            LoggingFacility.Log("checking " + configName);
            //return result;
        }
    }

public static class LoggingFacility
    {
        public static void Log(string text)
        {
            logger.Log(text);
        }
        private static ILogger logger;

          public static ILogger Logger
          {
              get { return logger; }
              set { logger = value; }
          }
    }

   [TestFixture]
    public class LogAnalyzerTests
    {
       [SetUp]
        public void Setup()                    ? Uses Setup() method
        {
            LoggingFacility.Logger = new StubLogger();
        }

         [Test]
          public void Analyze_EmptyFile_ThrowsException()
          {
              LogAnalyzer la = new LogAnalyzer();



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
154   CHAPTER 6     Test hierarchies and organization




                    la.Analyze("myemptyfile.txt");
                    //rest of test
                }
          }

          internal class StubLogger : ILogger
          {
              public void Log(string text)
              {
                  //do nothing
              }
          }

        [TestFixture]
         public class ConfigurationManagerTests
         {
             [SetUp]
              public void Setup()                    ? Uses Setup() method
              {
                  LoggingFacility.Logger = new StubLogger();
              }

               [Test]
                public void Analyze_EmptyFile_ThrowsException()
                {
                    ConfigurationManager cm = new ConfigurationManager();
                    bool configured = cm.IsConfigured("something");
                    //rest of test
                }
          }


      The LoggingFacility class is probably going to be used by many
      classes. It’s designed so that the code using it is testable by allowing the
      implementation of the logger to be replaced using the property setter
      (which is static).
      There are two classes that use the LoggingFacility class internally, and
      we’d like to test both of them: the LogAnalyzer and ConfigurationMan-
      ager classes.

      One possible way to refactor this code into a better state is to find a
      way to reuse the setup method ?, which is essentially the same for
      both test classes. They both replace the default logger implementation.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                    Building a test API for your application       155




We could refactor the test classes and create a base test class that con-
tains the setup method. The full code for the test classes is shown in
listing 6.2.
Listing 6.2 A refactored solution

public class BaseTestClass
    {
       [SetUp]
        public void Setup()
        {                                                              Refactors into
            Console.WriteLine("in setup");                             a common
            LoggingFacility.Logger = new StubLogger();                 setup method
        }
    }

   [TestFixture]
    public class LogAnalyzerTests : BaseTestClass |#2
    {
       [Test]
        public void Analyze_EmptyFile_ThrowsException()
        {
            LogAnalyzer la = new LogAnalyzer();
            la.Analyze("myemptyfile.txt");
            //rest of test
        }
                                                        Inherits Setup()
    }                                                   method
                                                        implementation
   [TestFixture]
    public class ConfigurationManagerTests :BaseTestClass
    {
       [Test]
        public void Analyze_EmptyFile_ThrowsException()
        {
            ConfigurationManager cm = new ConfigurationManager();
            bool configured = cm.IsConfigured("something");
            //rest of test
        }
    }


Figure 6.3 shows this pattern more clearly.




       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
156    CHAPTER 6     Test hierarchies and organization




Figure 6.3 One base class with a common setup method, and two test classes that
reuse that setup method

       The Setup method from the base class is now automatically run before
       each test in either of the derived classes. We’ve definitely reused some
       code, but there are pros and cons in every technique. The main prob-
       lem we’ve introduced into the derived test classes is that anyone read-
       ing the code can no longer easily understand what happens when setup
       is called. They will have to look up the setup method in the base class
       to see what the derived classes get by default. This leads to less read-
       able tests, but it also leads to more code reuse.
       What if you wanted to have your own derived setup in one of the
       derived classes? Most of the unit-testing frameworks (including
       NUnit) will allow you to make the setup method virtual and then over-
       ride it in the derived class. Listing 6.3 shows how a derived class can
       have its own setup method but still keep the original setup method
       (making them work one after the other).
       Listing 6.3 A derived test class with its own setup method

       public class BaseTestClass
        {
           [SetUp]                                                  Makes Setup()
            public virtual void Setup()|                            virtual to allow
            {                                                       overriding




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                          Building a test API for your application   157




            Console.WriteLine("in setup");
            LoggingFacility.Logger = new StubLogger();
      }
 }

[TestFixture]
 public class ConfigurationManagerTests :BaseTestClass
 {
     [SetUp]
      public override void Setup()                   Overrides and
      {                                              calls base
          base.Setup();
          Console.WriteLine("in derived");
          LoggingFacility.Logger = new StubLogger();
      }

          //...
  }


This style of inheritance is easier for the reader of the test class,
because it specifically indicates that there’s a base setup method that’s
called each time. You may be helping your team by requiring them to
always override base methods and call their base class’s implementa-
tion in the tests for the sake of readability. This approach is shown in
listing 6.4.
Listing 6.4 Overriding a setup method purely for clarity

[TestFixture]
 public class ConfigurationManagerTests :BaseTestClass
 {
    [SetUp]
     public override void Setup()
     {
         base.Setup();                              Overrides and
     }                                              calls base

      //...
 }


This type of coding may feel a bit weird at first, but anyone reading the
tests will thank you for making it clear what’s going on.



       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
158    CHAPTER 6   Test hierarchies and organization




Template test class pattern
       The template test class pattern creates an abstract class that contains
       abstract test methods that derived classes will have to implement. The
       driving force behind this pattern is the need to be able to dictate to
       deriving classes which tests they should always implement. It’s com-
       monly used when there’s a need to create one or more test classes for a
       set of classes that implement the same interface.
       Think of an interface as a “behavior contract” where the same end
       behavior is expected from all who have the contract, but they can
       achieve the end result in different ways. An example of such a behavior
       contract could be a set of parsers all implementing parse methods that
       act the same way but on different input types.
       Developers often neglect or forget to write all the required tests for a
       specific case. Having a base class for each set of identically interfaced
       classes can help create a basic test contract that all developers must
       implement in derived test classes.




                                            Figure 6.4 A template test pattern ensures
                                            that developers don’t forget important
                                            tests. The base class contains abstract
                                            tests that derived classes must implement.




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                            Building a test API for your application   159




       Figure 6.4 shows an example base class that helps to test data-layer
       CRUD (create, retrieve, update, and delete ) classes.
       I’ve found this technique useful in many situations, not only as a devel-
       oper, but also as an architect. As an architect, I was able to supply a list
       of essential test classes for developers to implement, and to provide
       guidance on what kinds of tests they’d want to write next. It’s essential
       in this situation that the naming of the tests is understandable.
       But what if you were to inherit real tests from the base class, and not
       abstract ones?
Abstract test driver class pattern
       The abstract test driver class pattern creates an abstract test class that con-
       tains test method implementations that all derived classes inherit by
       default, without needing to reimplement them. Instead of having
       abstract test methods, you implement real tests on the abstract class
       that your derived classes will inherit. It’s essential that your tests don’t
       explicitly test one class type, but instead test against an interface or
       base class in your production code under test.
       Let’s see a real scenario. Suppose you have the object model shown in
       figure 6.5 to test.
       The BaseStringParser is an abstract class that other classes derive from
       to implement some functionality over different string content types.
       From each string type (XML strings, IIS log strings, standard strings),
       we can get some sort of versioning info (metadata on the string that
       was put there earlier). We can get the version info from a custom
       header (the first few lines of the string) and check whether that header
       is valid for the purposes of our application. The XMLStringParser, IIS-
       LogStringParser, and StandardStringParser classes derive from this
       base class and implement the methods with logic for their specific
       string types.
       The first step in testing such a hierarchy is to write a set of tests for one
       of the derived classes (assuming the abstract class has no logic to test in
       it). Then you’d have to write the same kinds of tests for the other
       classes that have the same functionality.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
160     CHAPTER 6     Test hierarchies and organization




Figure 6.5 A typical inheritance hierarchy that we’d like to test includes an abstract
class and classes that derive from it.

        Listing 6.5 shows tests for the StandardStringParser that we might
        start out with before we refactor our test classes.
        Listing 6.5 An outline of a test class for StandardStringParser

        [TestFixture]
         public class StandardStringParserTests
         {                                                                  Defines
                                                                            the parser
            private StandardStringParser GetParser(string input)          ? factory
            {                                                               method
                return new StandardStringParser(input);
            }

           [Test]
            public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_SingleDigit_Found()
            {                                                          Uses
                string input = "header;version=1;\n";                w factory
                StandardStringParser parser = GetParser(input);        method

                  string versionFromHeader = parser.GetTextVersionFromHeader();
                  Assert.AreEqual("1",versionFromHeader);
            }




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                    Building a test API for your application   161




    [Test]
     public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_WithMinorVersion_Found()
     {
         string input = "header;version=1.1;\n";
         StandardStringParser parser = GetParser(input);          Uses
                                                              w factory
         //rest of the test                                       method
     }

    [Test]
     public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_WithRevision_Found()
     {
         string input = "header;version=1.1.1;\n";
         StandardStringParser parser = GetParser(input);
         //rest of the test
     }

    [Test]
     public void HasCorrectHeader_NoSpaces_ReturnsTrue()
     {
         string input = "header;version=1.1.1;\n";
         StandardStringParser parser = GetParser(input);

           bool result = parser.HasCorrectHeader();
           Assert.IsTrue(result);
     }

    [Test]
     public void HasCorrectHeader_WithSpaces_ReturnsTrue()
     {
         string input = "header ; version=1.1.1 ; \n";
         StandardStringParser parser = GetParser(input);

           //rest of the test
     }

    [Test]
     public void HasCorrectHeader_MissingVersion_ReturnsFalse()
     {
         string input = "header; \n";
         StandardStringParser parser = GetParser(input);

           //rest of the test
     }
}




         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
162   CHAPTER 6     Test hierarchies and organization




      Note how we use the GetParser() helper method ? to refactor away w
      the creation of the parser object, which we use in all the tests. We use
      the helper method, and not a setup method, because the constructor
      takes the input string to parse, so each test needs to be able to create a
      version of the parser to test with its own specific inputs.
      When you start writing tests for the other classes in the hierarchy,
      you’ll want to repeat the same tests that are in this specific parser class.
      All the other parsers should have the same outward behavior: getting
      the header version and validating that the header is valid. How they do
      this differs, but the behavior semantics are the same. This means that,
      for each class that derives from BaseStringParser, we’d write the same
      basic tests, and only the type of class under test would change.
      Instead of repeating all those tests manually, we can create a ParserT-
      estsBase class that contains all the basic tests we’d like to perform on
      any class that implements the IStringParser interface (or any class that
      derives from BaseStringParser). Listing 6.6 shows an example of this
      base class.
      Listing 6.6 An abstract test base class with test logic for IStringParser interface

      public abstract class BaseStringParserTests         Turns GetParser()
      {                                                   into an abstract method
          protected abstract IStringParser
                                   GetParser(string input);         ?
         [Test]
          public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_SingleDigit_Found()
          {
              string input = "header;version=1;\n";          w Calls  abstract
                                                                 factory method
              IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);

                string versionFromHeader = parser.GetTextVersionFromHeader();
                Assert.AreEqual("1",versionFromHeader);
          }

         [Test]
          public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_WithMinorVersion_Found()
          {
              string input = "header;version=1.1;\n";        w Calls  abstract
                                                                 factory method
              IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);
              //...



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                     Building a test API for your application   163




     }

    [Test]
     public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_WithRevision_Found()
     {
         string input = "header;version=1.1.1;\n";
         IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);
         //...
     }

    [Test]
     public void HasCorrectHeader_NoSpaces_ReturnsTrue()
     {
         string input = "header;version=1.1.1;\n";
         IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);

           bool result = parser.HasCorrectHeader();
           Assert.IsTrue(result);
     }

    [Test]
     public void HasCorrectHeader_WithSpaces_ReturnsTrue()
     {
         string input = "header ; version=1.1.1 ; \n";
         IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);
         //...
     }

    [Test]
     public void HasCorrectHeader_MissingVersion_ReturnsFalse()
     {
         string input = "header; \n";
         IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);
         //...
     }
}


Several things are different from listing 6.5 and are important in the
implementation of the base class:
❂   The GetParser() method is abstract ?, and its return type is now
    IStringParser. This means we can override this factory method in
    derived test classes and return the type of the parser we’d like to test.




         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
164   CHAPTER 6     Test hierarchies and organization




      ❂ The test methods only get an IStringParser interface w and don’t
        know the actual class they’re running against.
      ❂ A derived class can choose to add tests against a specific subclass of

        IStringParser by adding another test method in its own test class (as
        we’ll see next).
      Once we have the base class in order, we can easily add tests to the
      various subclasses. Listing 6.7 shows how we can write tests for the
      StandardStringParser by deriving from BaseStringParserTests.

      Listing 6.7 A derived test class that overrides a small number of factory methods

      [TestFixture]
       public class StandardStringParserTests : BaseStringParserTests
       {
          protected override IStringParser GetParser(string input)
          {
              return new StandardStringParser(input);
          }                                                   ? Overrides
                                                                 abstract factory
                                                                 method
      [Test]
          public void                                              w Adds
                                                                      new test
              GetStringVersionFromHeader_DoubleDigit_Found()
          {
              //this test is specific to the StandardStringParser type
              string input = "header;version=11;\n";
              IStringParser parser = GetParser(input);

                string versionFromHeader = parser.GetTextVersionFromHeader();
                Assert.AreEqual("11", versionFromHeader);
          }

      }


      Note that in listing 6.7 we only have two methods in the derived class:
      ❂ The factory method ? that tells the base class what instance of the
        class to run tests on
      ❂ A new test w that may not belong in the base class, or that may be

        specific to the current type under test




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                             Building a test API for your application   165




Figure 6.6 A standard test class hierarchy implementation. Most of the tests are in
the base class, but derived classes can add their own specific tests.

        Figure 6.6 shows the visual inheritance chain that we’ve just created.
        How do we modify existing code to use this pattern? That’s our next topic.
Refactoring your test class into a test class hierarchy
        Most developers don’t start writing their tests with these inheritance
        patterns in mind. Instead, they write the tests normally, as was shown
        in listing 6.5. The steps to convert your tests into a base class are fairly
        easy, particularly if you have IDE refactoring tools available, like the
        ones found in Eclipse, IntelliJ IDEA, or Visual Studio 2008 (Jet-
        Brains’ ReSharper or Refactor! from DevExpress).
        Here is a list of possible steps for refactoring your test class:
        1  Refactor: extract the superclass.
          • Create a base class (BaseXXXTests).
          • Move the factory methods (like GetParser) into the base class.
          • Move all the tests to the base class.
        2 Refactor: make factory methods abstract, and return interfaces.

        3 Refactor: find all the places in the test methods where explicit class
           types are used, and change them to use the interfaces of those types
           instead.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
166    CHAPTER 6       Test hierarchies and organization




       4    In the derived class, implement the abstract factory methods and
            return the explicit types.
       You can also use .NET generics to create the inheritance patterns.
A variation using .NET generics to implement test hierarchy
       You can use generics as part of the base test class. This way, you don’t
       even need to override any methods in derived classes; just declare the
       type you’re testing against. Listing 6.8 shows both the generic version
       of the test base class and a class derived from it.
       Listing 6.8 Implementing test case inheritance with .NET generics

       public abstract class StringParserTests<T>         Defines generic
           where T:IStringParser                       ? constraint
       {                                                  on parameter
           protected T GetParser(string input)             w Returns generic type
           {
               return (T) Activator.CreateInstance(typeof (T), input);
           }

            [Test]
             public void GetStringVersionFromHeader_SingleDigit_Found()
             {
                 string input = "header; \n";
                                                               e Gets  generic type
                                                                  variable instead
                 T parser = GetParser(input);                     of an interface

                   bool result = parser.HasCorrectHeader();
                   Assert.IsFalse(result);
             }

             //more tests
             //...
        }

        // this is the derived test class:
       [TestFixture]
        public class StandardStringParserGenericTests
                      :StringParserTests<StandardStringParser>             Inherits
        {                                                                  from generic
        }                                                                  base class




                 Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                           Building a test API for your application   167




        There are several things that change in the generic implementation of
        the hierarchy:
        ❂ The GetParser factory method w no longer needs to be overridden.
          Create the object using Activator.CreateInstance (which allows
          creating objects without knowing their type) and send the input
          string arguments to the constructor.
        ❂ The tests themselves don’t use the IStringParser interface, but

          instead use the T generic type e.
        ❂ The generic class declaration contains the where clause that specifies

          that the T type of the class must implement the IStringParser inter-
          face ?.
        Overall, I don’t find more benefit in using generic base classes. Any
        performance gain that would result is insignificant to these tests, but I
        leave it to you to see what makes sense for your projects. It’s more a
        matter of taste than anything else.
        Let’s move on to something completely different: infrastructure API in
        your test projects.

6.5.2   Creating test utility classes and methods
        As you write your tests, you’ll also create many simple utility methods
        that may or may not end up inside your test classes. These utility
        classes become a big part of your test API, and they may turn out to be
        a simple object model you could use as you develop your tests.
        You might end up with the following types of utility methods:
        ❂ Factory methods for objects that are complex to create or that rou-
          tinely get created by your tests.
        ❂ System initialization methods (such as methods for setting up the

          system state before testing, or changing logging facilities to use stub
          loggers).
        ❂ Object configuration methods (for example, methods that set the

          internal state of an object, such as setting a customer to be invalid for
          a transaction).




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
168     CHAPTER 6    Test hierarchies and organization




        ❂ Methods that set up or read from external resources such as data-
          bases, configuration files, and test input files (for example, a method
          that loads a text file with all the permutations you’d like to use when
          sending in inputs for a specific method, and the expected results).
          This is more commonly used in integration or system testing.
        ❂ Special assert utility methods, which may assert something that’s

          complex or that’s repeatedly tested inside the system’s state. (If
          something was written to the system log, the method might assert
          that X, Y, and Z are true, but not G.)
        You may end up refactoring your utility methods into these types of
        utility classes:
        ❂ Special assert utility classes that contain all the custom assert methods
        ❂ Special factory classes that hold the factory methods

        ❂ Special configuration classes or database configuration classes that

          hold integration style actions
        Having those utility methods around doesn’t guarantee anyone will use
        them. I’ve been to plenty of projects where developers kept reinventing
        the wheel, recreating utility methods they didn’t know already existed.
        That’s why making your API known is an important next step.

6.5.3   Making your API known to developers
        It’s imperative that the people who write tests know about the various
        APIs that have been developed while writing the application and its
        tests. There are several ways to make sure your APIs are used:
        ❂ Have teams of two people write tests together (at least once in a
          while), where one of the people is familiar with the existing APIs
          and can teach the other person, as they write new tests, about the
          existing benefits and code that could be used.
        ❂ Have a short document (no more than a couple of pages) or a cheat

          sheet that details the types of APIs out there and where to find them.
          You can create short documents for specific parts of your testing
          framework (APIs specific to the data layer, for example) or a global
          one for the whole application. If it’s not short, no one will maintain it.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                            Summary       169




      One possible way to make sure it’s up to date is by automating the
      generation process:
      • Have a known set of prefixes or postfixes on the API helpers’
         names (helperXX for example).
      • Have a special tool that parses out the names and their locations
         and generates a document that lists them and where to find them,
         or have some simple directives that the special tool can parse from
         comments you put on them.
      • Automate the generation of this document as part of the auto-
         mated build process.
   ❂ Discuss changes to the APIs during team meetings—one or two sen-

      tences outlining the main changes and where to look for the signifi-
      cant parts. That way the team knows that this is important and it’s
      always on people’s minds.
   ❂ Go over this document with new employees during their orientation.

   ❂ Perform test reviews (as opposed to code reviews) that make sure

      tests are up to standards of readability, maintainability, and correct-
      ness, and ensure that the right APIs are used when needed.
   Following one or more of these recommendations can help keep your
   team productive and will create a shared language the team can use
   when writing their tests.

6.6 Summary
   Let’s look back and see what we can draw out from the chapter we’ve
   been through.
   ❂ Whatever testing you do—however you do it—automate it, and use
     an automated build procedure to run it as many times as possible
     during day or night.
   ❂ Separate the integration tests from the unit tests (the slow tests from

     the fast ones) so that your team can have a safe green zone where all
     the tests must pass.
   ❂ Map out tests by project and by type (unit versus integration tests,

     slow versus fast tests), and separate them into different directories,



         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
170   CHAPTER 6    Test hierarchies and organization




        folders, or namespaces (or all of the above). I usually use all three
        types of separation.
      ❂ Use a test class hierarchy to apply the same set of tests to multiple

        related types under test in a hierarchy, or to types that share a com-
        mon interface or base class.
      ❂ Use helper classes and utility classes instead of hierarchies if the test

        class hierarchy makes tests less readable, especially if there’s a
        shared setup method in the base class. Different people have differ-
        ent opinions on when to use which, but readability is usually the key
        reason for not using hierarchies.
      ❂ Make your API known to your team. If you don’t, you’ll lose time

        and money as team members unknowingly reinvent many of the
        APIs over and over again.
      The next three chapters will deal with practices you can use to make
      your tests more maintainable, readable, and correct (in the sense that
      they test the right things).




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
7

The pillars of good tests
    This chapter covers
           • Writing trustworthy tests
           • Writing maintainable tests
           • Writing readable tests
           • Exploring naming conventions for unit tests




    o matter how you organize your tests, or how many you have, they’re

N   worth very little if you can’t trust them, maintain them, or read them.
    The tests that you write should have three properties that together make
    them good:
    ❂ Trustworthiness—Developers will want to run trustworthy tests, and they’ll
      accept the test results with confidence. Trustworthy tests don’t have
      bugs, and they test the right things.
    ❂ Maintainability—Nonmaintainable tests are nightmares because they can

      ruin project schedules, or you risk losing the tests when the project is
      put on a more aggressive schedule. Developers will simply stop main-
      taining and fixing tests that take too long to change.
    ❂ Readability—This means not just being able to read a test but also figur-

      ing out the problem if the test seems to be wrong. Without readability,
      the other two pillars fall pretty quickly. Maintaining tests becomes
      harder, and you can’t trust them anymore.


                                          171



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
172     CHAPTER 7   The pillars of good tests




        This chapter presents a series of practices related to each of these three
        pillars that you can use when doing test reviews. Together, the three
        pillars ensure your time is well used. Drop one of them, and you run
        the risk of wasting everyone’s time.

 7.1 Writing trustworthy tests
        There are several indications that a test is trustworthy. If it passes, you
        don’t say, “I’ll step through the code in the debugger to make sure.”
        You trust that it passes and that the code it tests works for that specific
        scenario. If the test fails, you don’t tell yourself, “Oh, it’s supposed to
        fail,” or “That doesn’t mean the code isn’t working.” You believe that
        there’s a problem in your code and not in your test. In short, a trust-
        worthy test is one that makes you feel you know what’s going on and
        that you can do something about it.
        In this chapter, I’ll introduce guidelines and techniques to help you do
        the following:
        ❂ Decide when to remove or change tests
        ❂ Avoid test logic

        ❂ Test only one thing

        ❂ Make tests easy to run

        ❂ Assure code coverage


        I’ve found that tests that follow these guidelines tend to be tests that I
        can trust more than others, and that I feel confident will continue to
        find errors in my code.

7.1.1   Deciding when to remove or change tests
        Once you have tests in place, you should generally not change or
        remove them. They are there as your safety net, to let you know if any-
        thing breaks when you change your code. That said, there are times
        you might feel compelled to change or remove existing tests. To under-
        stand when this might cause a problem and when it’s reasonable to do
        so, let’s look at the reasons for each.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                     Writing trustworthy tests   173




      The main reason for removing a test is when it fails. A test can “sud-
      denly” fail for several reasons:
      ❂   Production bugs—There’s a bug in the production code under test.
      ❂   Test bugs—There’s a bug in the test.
      ❂   Semantics or API changes—The     semantics of the code under test
        changed, but not the functionality.
      ❂ Conflicting or invalid tests—The production code was changed to reflect

        a conflicting requirement.
      There are also reasons for changing or removing tests when nothing is
      wrong with the tests or code:
      ❂ To rename or refactor the test
      ❂ To eliminate duplicate tests

      Let’s see how you might deal with each of these cases.
Production bugs
      A production bug occurs when you change the production code and an
      existing test breaks. If indeed this is a bug in the code under test, your
      test is fine, and you shouldn’t need to touch the test. This is the best
      and most desired outcome of having tests.
      Because the occurrence of production bugs is one of the main reasons
      we have unit tests in the first place, the only thing left to do is to fix the
      bug in the production code. Don’t touch the test.
Test bugs
      If there’s a bug in the test, you need to change the test. Bugs in tests are
      notoriously hard to detect in the first place, because the test is assumed
      to be correct. I’ve detected several stages developers go through when
      a test bug is encountered:
      1     Denial—The developer will keep looking for a problem in the code
            itself, changing it, causing all the other tests to start failing. The
            developer introduces new bugs into production code while hunting
            for the bug that’s actually in the test.
      2     Amusement—The developer will call another developer, if possible,
            and they will hunt for the non-existent bug together.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
174   CHAPTER 7    The pillars of good tests




      3   Debuggerment—The developer will patiently debug the test and dis-
          cover that there’s a problem in the test. This can take anywhere
          from an hour to a couple of days.
      4   Acceptance and slappage—The developer will eventually realize where
          the bug is, and will slap herself on the forehead.
      When you finally find and start fixing the bug, it’s important to make
      sure that the bug gets fixed, and that the test doesn’t magically pass by
      testing the wrong thing. You need to do the following:
      1   Fix the bug in your test.
      2   Make sure the test fails when it should.
      3   Make sure the test passes when it should.
      The first step, fixing the test, is quite straightforward. The next two
      steps make sure you’re still testing the correct thing, and that your test
      can still be trusted.
      Once you have fixed your test, go to the production code under test
      and change it so that it manifests the bug that the test is supposed to
      catch. Then run the test. If the test fails, that means it’s half working.
      The other half will be completed in step 3. If the test doesn’t fail, you’re
      most likely testing the wrong thing. (I’ve seen developers accidentally
      delete the asserts from their tests when fixing bugs in tests. You’d be
      surprised how often that happens and how effective step 2 is at catch-
      ing these cases.)
      Once you see the test fail, change your production code so that the bug
      no longer exists. The test should now pass. If it doesn’t, you either still
      have a bug in your test, or you’re testing the wrong thing. You want to
      see the test fail and then pass again after you fix it so that you can be
      sure that it fails and passes when it should.
Semantics or API changes

      A test can fail when the production code under test changes so that an
      object being tested now needs to be used differently, even though it may
      still have the same end functionality.




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                  Writing trustworthy tests   175




Consider the simple test in listing 7.1.
Listing 7.1 A simple test against the LogAnalyzer class

[Test]
 public void SemanticsChange()
 {
     LogAnalyzer logan = new LogAnalyzer();
     Assert.IsFalse(logan.IsValid("abc"));                         ?
 }


Let’s say that a semantics change has been made to the LogAnalyzer
class, in the form of an Initialize method. You now have to call Ini-
tialize on the LogAnalyzer class before calling any of the other meth-
ods on it.
If you introduce this change in the production code, the assert line ? of
the test in listing 7.1 will throw an exception because Initialize was
not called. The test will be broken, but it’s still a valid test. The func-
tionality it tests still works, but the semantics of using the object under
test has changed.
In this case, we need to change the test to match the new semantics, as
shown in listing 7.2.
Listing 7.2 The changed test using the new semantics of LogAnalyzer

[Test]
 public void SemanticsChange()
 {
     LogAnalyzer logan = new LogAnalyzer();
 logan.Initialize();
     Assert.IsFalse(logan.IsValid("abc"));
 }


Changing semantics accounts for most of the bad experiences develop-
ers have with writing and maintaining unit tests, because the burden of
changing tests while the API of the code under test keeps changing
gets bigger and bigger. Listing 7.3 shows a more maintainable version
of the test in listing 7.2.



      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
176    CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




       Listing 7.3 A refactored test using a factory method

       [Test]
        public void SemanticsChange()                                     Uses
        {                                                             ? factory
            LogAnalyzer logan = MakeDefaultAnalyzer();                    method
            Assert.IsFalse(logan.IsValid("abc"));
        }

        public static LogAnalyzer MakeDefaultAnalyzer()
        {
            LogAnalyzer analyzer = new LogAnalyzer();
            analyzer.Initialize();
            return analyzer;
        }


       In this case, the refactored test uses a utility factory method ?. We can
       do the same for other tests and have them use the same utility method.
       Then, if the semantics of creating and initializing the object should
       change again, we don’t need to change all the tests that create this
       object; we just need to change one little utility method. We’ll see other
       maintainability techniques later in this chapter.
Conflicting or invalid tests
       A conflict problem arises when the production code introduces a new
       feature that’s in direct conflict with a test. This means that, instead of
       the test discovering a bug, it discovers conflicting requirements.
       Let’s look at a short example. Suppose the customer requests LogAna-
       lyzer to not allow filenames shorter than three letters. The analyzer
       should throw an exception in that case. The feature is implemented and
       tests are written.
       Much later on, the customer realizes that three-letter filenames do have
       a use and requests that they be handled in a special way. The feature is
       added and the production code changed. Then we write new tests so
       that the production code no longer throws an exception. Suddenly, an
       old test (the one with a three-letter filename) breaks because it expects
       an exception. Fixing the production code to make that test pass would
       break the new test that expects three-letter filenames to be handled in a
       special way.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Writing trustworthy tests   177




       This either-or scenario, where only one of two tests can pass, serves as
       a warning that these may be conflicting tests. In this case, you first
       need to make sure that the tests are in conflict. Once that’s confirmed,
       you need to decide which requirement to keep. You should then
       remove (not comment out) the invalid requirement and its tests.
       Conflicting tests can sometimes point out problems in customer
       requirements, and the customer may need to decide on the validity of
       each requirement.
Renaming or refactoring tests
       An unreadable test is more of a problem than a solution. It can hinder
       your code’s readability and your understanding of any problems it finds.
       If you encounter a test that has a bad name or that can be made more
       maintainable, change the test code (but don’t change the basic func-
       tionality of the test). Listing 7.3 showed one such example of refactor-
       ing a test for maintainability, which also makes it a lot more readable.
Eliminating duplicate tests
       When dealing with a team of developers, it’s common to come across
       multiple tests written by different developers for the same functionality.
       I’m not crazy about removing duplicate tests for a couple of reasons:
       ❂ The more (good) tests you have, the more certain you are to catch bugs.
       ❂ You can read the tests and see different ways or semantics of testing

         the same thing.
       Here are some of the cons of having duplicate tests:
       ❂ It may be harder to maintain several different tests that provide the
         same functionality.
       ❂ Some tests may be higher quality than others, and you need to

         review them all for correctness.
       ❂ Multiple tests may break when a single thing doesn’t work. (This

         may not really be a con.)
       ❂ Similar tests must be named differently, or the tests can be spread

         across different classes.
       ❂ Multiple tests may create more maintainability issues.




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
178     CHAPTER 7   The pillars of good tests




        Here are some pros:
        ❂ Tests may have little differences, and so can be thought of as testing

          the same things slightly differently. They may make for a larger and
          better picture of the object being tested.
        ❂ Some tests may be more expressive than others, so more tests may

          improve the chances of test readability.
        Although, as I said, I am not crazy about removing duplicate tests, I
        usually do so; the cons usually outweigh the pros.
7.1.2   Avoiding logic in tests
        The chances of having bugs in your tests increase almost exponentially
        as you include more and more logic in them. I’ve seen plenty of tests
        that should have been simple turned into dynamically changing logic,
        random-number generating, thread-creating, file-writing monsters that
        are little test engines in their own right. Sadly, because they had a
        [Test] attribute on them, the writer didn’t consider that they might
        have bugs or didn’t write them in a maintainable manner. Those test
        monsters take more time to debug and verify than they save.
        But all monsters start out small. Often, a guru in the company will look
        at a test and start thinking, “What if we made the method loop and cre-
        ate random numbers as input? We’d surely find lots more bugs that
        way!” And you will, especially in your tests. Test bugs are one of the
        most annoying things for developers, because you’ll almost never
        search for the cause of a failing test in the test itself.
        If you have any of the following inside a test method, your test contains
        logic that should not be there:
        ❂ switch, if, or else statements

        ❂ foreach, for, or while loops

        A test that contains logic is usually testing more than one thing at a
        time, which isn’t recommended, because the test is less readable and
        more fragile. But test logic also adds complexity that may contain a
        hidden bug.
        Tests should, as a general rule, be a series of method calls with no con-
        trol flows, not even try-catch, and with assert calls. Anything more
        complex causes the following problems:



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                      Writing trustworthy tests   179




        ❂ The test is harder to read and understand.
        ❂ The test is hard to re-create. (Imagine a multithreaded test, or a test

          with random numbers that suddenly fail.)
        ❂ The test is more likely to have a bug or to test the wrong thing.

        ❂ Naming the test may be harder because it does multiple things.


        Generally, monster tests replace original simpler tests, and that makes
        it harder to find bugs in the production code. If you must create a mon-
        ster test, it should be added to and not replace existing tests.

7.1.3   Testing only one thing
        If your test contains more than a single assert, it may be testing more
        than one thing. That doesn’t sound so bad until you go to name your
        test or consider what happens if the first assert fails.
        Naming a test may seem like a simple task, but if you’re testing more
        than one thing, giving the test a good name that indicates what is being
        tested becomes almost impossible. When you test just one thing, nam-
        ing the test is easy.
        A failed assert message in most test frameworks (NUnit included)
        throws a special type of exception that’s caught by the test framework
        runner. When the test framework catches that exception, it means the
        test has failed. Unfortunately, exceptions, by design, don’t let the code
        continue. The method exits on the same line the exception is thrown.
        Listing 7.4 shows an example. If the first assert (IsFalse()) fails, it will
        throw an exception, which means the second assert will never run.

        Listing 7.4 A test with multiple asserts

        [Test]
         public void TestWithMultipleAsserts()
         {
             LogAnalyzer logan = MakeDefaultAnalyzer();

              Assert.IsFalse(logan.IsValid("abc"));
              Assert.IsTrue(logan.IsValid("abcde.txt"));
         }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
180     CHAPTER 7    The pillars of good tests




        Consider assert failures as symptoms of a disease. The more symptoms
        you can find, the easier the disease will be to diagnose. After a failure,
        subsequent asserts aren’t executed, and you miss seeing other possible
        symptoms that could provide valuable data (symptoms) that would
        help you narrow your focus and discover the underlying problem.
        Running multiple asserts in a single test adds complexity with little
        value. You should run additional asserts in separate, self-contained
        unit tests so that you can see what really fails.

7.1.4   Making tests easy to run
        In chapter 6, I discussed the safe green zone for tests. If developers
        don’t trust your tests to run out of the box easily and consistently, they
        won’t run them. Refactoring your tests so they’re easy to run and pro-
        vide consistent results will make them feel more trustworthy. Having a
        safe green zone in your tests can lead to more confidence in your tests.

7.1.5   Assuring code coverage
        To ensure good coverage for your new code, use one of the automated
        tools (for example, NCover or Visual Studio Team System Test Edi-
        tion). Find a good tool and stick with it, making sure you never have
        low coverage; less than 20 percent means you’re missing a whole
        bunch of tests. You never know if the next developer will try to play
        with your code. He may try to optimize it or wrongly delete some
        essential line, and if you don’t have a test that will fail, the mistake
        may go unnoticed.
        When doing code and test reviews, you can also do a manual check,
        which is great for ad hoc testing of a test: try commenting out a line or a
        constraint check. If all tests still pass, you might be missing some tests,
        or the current tests may not be testing the right thing.
        When you add a new test that was missing, check whether you’ve
        added the correct test with these steps:
        1   Comment out the production code you think isn’t being covered.
        2   Run all the tests.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                   Writing maintainable tests   181




    3   If all the tests pass, you’re missing a test or are testing the wrong
        thing. Otherwise there would have been a test somewhere that was
        expecting that line to be called, or some resulting consequence of
        that line of code to be true, and that missing test would now fail.
    4   Once you’ve found a missing test, you’ll need to add it. Keep the
        code commented out and write a new test that fails, proving that the
        code you’ve commented is missing.
    5   Uncomment the code you commented before.
    6   The test you wrote should now pass. You’ve detected and added a
        missing test!
    7   If the test still fails, it means the test may have a bug or is testing the
        wrong thing. Modify the test until it passes. Now you’ll want to see
        that the test is OK, making sure it fails when it should, and doesn’t
        just pass when it should. To make sure the test fails when it should,
        reintroduce the bug into your code (commenting out the line of pro-
        duction code) and see if the test indeed fails.
    As an added confidence booster, you might also try replacing various
    parameters or internal variables in your method under test with con-
    stants (making a bool always true to see what happens, for example).
    The trick to all this testing is making sure it doesn’t take up too much
    time to make it worth your while. That’s what the next section is about:
    maintainability.

7.2 Writing maintainable tests
    Maintainability is one of the core issues most developers face when
    writing unit tests. Eventually the tests seem to become harder and
    harder to maintain and understand, and every little change to the sys-
    tem seems to break one test or another, even if bugs don’t exist. With
    all pieces of code, time adds a layer of “indirection” between what you
    think the code does and what it really does.
    This chapter will cover some techniques I’ve learned the hard way,
    writing unit tests in various teams. They include testing only against




           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
182     CHAPTER 7   The pillars of good tests




        public contracts, removing duplication in tests, and enforcing test isola-
        tion, among others.

7.2.1   Testing private or protected methods
        Private or protected methods are usually private for a good reason in
        the developer’s mind. Sometimes it’s to hide implementation details, so
        that the implementation can change later without the end functionality
        changing. It could also be for security-related or IP-related reasons
        (obfuscation, for example).
        When you test a private method, you’re testing against a contract inter-
        nal to the system, which may well change. Internal contracts are
        dynamic, and they can change when you refactor the system. When
        they change, your test could fail because some internal work is being
        done differently, even though the overall functionality of the system
        remains the same.
        For testing purposes, the public contract (the overall functionality) is
        all that you need to care about. Testing the functionality of private
        methods may lead to breaking tests, even though the overall functional-
        ity is correct.
        If a method is worth testing, it might be worth making it public, static,
        or at least internal, and defining a public contract against any user of it.
        In some cases, the design may be cleaner if you put the method in a dif-
        ferent class altogether. We’ll look at these approaches in a moment.
        Does this mean there should eventually be no private methods in the
        code base? No. With test-driven development, we usually write tests
        against methods that are public, and those public methods are later
        refactored into calling smaller, private methods. All the while, the tests
        against the public methods continue to pass.
Making methods public
        Making a method public isn’t necessarily a bad thing. It may seem to
        go against the object-oriented principles you were raised on, but want-
        ing to test a method means that the method has a known behavior or con-
        tract against the calling code. By making it public, you’re making this




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                   Writing maintainable tests   183




      official. By keeping the method private, you tell all the developers who
      come after you that they can change the implementation of the method
      without worrying about unknown code that uses it, because it only
      serves as part of a larger group of things that together make up a con-
      tract to the calling code.
Extracting methods to new classes

      If your method contains a lot of logic that can stand on its own, or it
      uses state in the class that’s only relevant to the method in question, it
      may be a good idea to extract the method into a new class, with a spe-
      cific role in the system. You can then test that class separately. Michael
      Feathers’ book, Working Effectively with Legacy Code, has some good exam-
      ples of this technique.
Making methods static

      If your method doesn’t use any of its class’s variables, you might want
      to refactor the method by making it static. That makes it much more
      testable, but also states that this method is a sort of utility method that
      has a known public contract specified by its name.
Making methods internal

      When all else fails, and you can’t afford to expose the method in an
      “official” way, you might want to make it internal, and then use the
      [InternalsVisibleTo("TestAssembly")] attribute on the production
      code assembly so that tests can still call that method. This is my least
      favorite approach, but sometimes there’s no choice (perhaps because of
      security reasons, lack of control over the code’s design, and so on).
      Making the method internal isn’t a great way to make sure your tests
      are more maintainable, because a coder can still feel it’s easier to
      change the method. But by exposing a method as an explicit public
      contract, the coder who may change it knows that the method has a
      real usage contract he can’t break.
      Removing the method isn’t a good option because the production code
      uses the method too. Otherwise, there would be no reason to write the
      tests in the first place.




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
184     CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




        Another way to make code more maintainable is to remove duplication
        in tests.

7.2.2   Removing duplication
        Duplication in our unit tests can hurt us as developers just as much as
        (if not more than) duplication in production code. The “don’t repeat
        yourself” (DRY) principle should be in effect in test code as in produc-
        tion code. Duplicated code means more code to change when one
        aspect we test against changes. Changing a constructor or changing the
        semantics of using a class can have a large effect on tests that have a lot
        of duplicated code.
        To understand why, let’s begin with a simple example of a test, seen in
        listing 7.5.
        Listing 7.5 A class under test, and a test that uses it

        public class LogAnalyzer
            {
                public bool IsValid(string fileName)
                {
                    if (fileName.Length < 8)
                    {
                        return true;
                    }
                    return false;
                }
            }

           [TestFixture]
            public class LogAnalyzerTestsMaintainable
            {
               [Test]
                public void IsValid_LengthBiggerThan8_IsFalse()
                {
                    LogAnalyzer logan = new LogAnalyzer();
                    bool valid = logan.IsValid("123456789");
                    Assert.IsFalse(valid);
                }
            }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                  Writing maintainable tests      185




The test at the bottom of listing 7.5 seems reasonable, until you intro-
duce another test for the same class and end up with two tests, as in
listing 7.6.
Listing 7.6 Two tests with duplication

[Test]
    public void IsValid_LengthBiggerThan8_IsFalse()
    {
        LogAnalyzer logan = new LogAnalyzer();
        bool valid = logan.IsValid("123456789");
        Assert.IsFalse(valid);
    }

   [Test]
    public void IsValid_LengthSmallerThan8_IsTrue()
    {
        LogAnalyzer logan = new LogAnalyzer();
        bool valid = logan.IsValid("1234567");
        Assert.IsTrue(valid);
    }


What’s wrong with the tests in listing 7.6? The main problem is that, if
the way you use LogAnalyzer changes (its semantics), the tests will have
to be maintained independently of each other, leading to more mainte-
nance work. Listing 7.7 shows an example of such a change.
Listing 7.7 LogAnalyzer with changed semantics that now requires initialization

public class LogAnalyzer
    {
    private bool initialized=false;

         public bool IsValid(string fileName)
         {
             if(!initialized)
             {
                 throw new NotInitializedException(
                "The analyzer.Initialize() method should be" +
                " called before any other operation!");
             }




       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
186   CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




                    if (fileName.Length < 8)
                    {
                        return true;
                    }
                    return false;
                }
                public void Initialize()
                {
                //initialization logic here
                ...
                initialized=true;
                }
          }


      Now, the two tests in listing 7.6 will both break because they both
      neglect to call Initialize() against the LogAnalyzer class. Because we
      have code duplication (both of the tests create the class within the test),
      we need to go into each one and change it to call Initialize().
      We can refactor the tests to remove the duplication by creating the
      LogAnalyzer in a CreateDefaultAnalyzer() method that both tests can
      call. We could also push the creation and initialization up into a new
      setup method in our test class.
Removing duplication using a helper method
      Listing 7.8 shows how you could refactor the tests into a more main-
      tainable state by introducing a shared factory method that creates a
      default instance of LogAnalyzer. Assuming all the tests were written to
      use this factory method, we could then add a call to Initialize()
      within that factory method instead of changing all the tests to call Ini-
      tialize().

      Listing 7.8 Adding the Initialize() call in the factory method

      [Test]
       public void IsValid_LengthBiggerThan8_IsFalse()
       {
           LogAnalyzer logan = GetNewAnalyzer();
           bool valid = logan.IsValid("123456789");
           Assert.IsFalse(valid);
       }




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                        Writing maintainable tests   187




      [Test]
       public void IsValid_LengthSmallerThan8_IsTrue()
       {
           LogAnalyzer logan = GetNewAnalyzer();
           bool valid = logan.IsValid("1234567");
           Assert.IsTrue(valid);
       }

       private LogAnalyzer GetNewAnalyzer()
       {
           LogAnalyzer analyzer = new LogAnalyzer();
           analyzer.Initialize();
           return analyzer;
       }


      Factory methods aren’t the only way to remove duplication in tests, as
      the next section shows.
Removing duplication using [SetUp]
      We could also easily initialize LogAnalyzer within the Setup method, as
      shown in listing 7.9.
      Listing 7.9 Using a setup method to remove duplication

      [SetUp]
       public void Setup()
       {
           logan=new LogAnalyzer();
           logan.Initialize();
       }

       private LogAnalyzer logan= null;

      [Test]
       public void IsValid_LengthBiggerThan8_IsFalse()
       {
           bool valid = logan.IsValid("123456789");
           Assert.IsFalse(valid);
       }

      [Test]
       public void IsValid_LengthSmallerThan8_IsTrue()
       {




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
188     CHAPTER 7   The pillars of good tests




             bool valid = logan.IsValid("1234567");
             Assert.IsTrue(valid);
         }


        In this case, we don’t even need a line that creates the analyzer object
        in each test: a shared class instance is initialized before each test with a
        new instance of LogAnalyzer, and then Initialize() is called on that
        instance. But beware: using a setup method to remove duplication isn’t
        always a good idea, as I explain in the next section.

7.2.3   Using setup methods in a maintainable manner
        The Setup() method is easy to use. In fact, it’s almost too easy to
        use—enough so that developers tend to use it for things it was not
        meant for, and tests become less readable and maintainable.
        Nevertheless, setup methods have several limitations, which you can
        get around using simple helper methods:
        ❂ Setup methods can only help when you need to initialize things.
        ❂ Setup methods aren’t always the best candidate for duplication

          removal. Removing duplication isn’t always about creating and ini-
          tializing new instances of objects. Sometimes it’s about removing
          duplication in assertion logic, calling out code in a specific way.
        ❂ Setup methods can’t have parameters or return values.

        ❂ Setup methods can’t be used as factory methods that return values.

          They’re run before the test executes, so they must be more generic in
          the way they work. Tests sometimes need to request specific things
          or call shared code with a parameter for the specific test (for exam-
          ple, retrieve an object and set its property to a specific value).
        ❂ Setup methods should only contain code that applies to all the tests

          in the current test class, or the method will be harder to read and
          understand.
        Now that we know the basic limitations of setup methods, let’s see how
        developers try to get around them in their quest to use setup methods
        no matter what, instead of using helper methods. Developers abuse
        setup methods in several ways:



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                          Writing maintainable tests       189




       ❂ Initializing objects in the setup method that are only used in some of
         the tests in the class
       ❂ Having setup code that’s long and hard to understand

       ❂ Setting up mocks and fake objects within the setup method


       Let’s take a closer look at these.
Initializing objects that are only used by some of the tests
       This sin is a deadly one. Once you commit it, it becomes difficult to
       maintain the tests or even read them, because the setup method quickly
       becomes loaded with objects that are specific only to some of the tests.
       Listing 7.10 shows what our test class would look like if we initialized a
       FileInfo object setup method but only used it in one test ?.

       Listing 7.10 A poorly implemented Setup() method

       [SetUp]
        public void Setup()
        {
           logan=new LogAnalyzer();
           logan.Initialize();
                                                                               ? Used only
            fileInfo=new FileInfo("c:\\someFile.txt");                             in one test
        }

        private FileInfo fileInfo = null;
        private LogAnalyzer logan= null;

       [Test]
        public void IsValid_LengthBiggerThan8_IsFalse()
        {
           bool valid = logan.IsValid("123456789");
           Assert.IsFalse(valid);
        }

       [Test]
        public void IsValid_BadFileInfoInput_returnsFalse()
        {
           bool valid = logan.IsValid(fileInfo);
           Assert.IsFalse(valid);
        }




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
190    CHAPTER 7    The pillars of good tests




       [Test]
        public void IsValid_LengthSmallerThan8_IsTrue()
        {
           bool valid = logan.IsValid("1234567");
           Assert.IsTrue(valid);
        }

        private LogAnalyzer GetNewAnalyzer()
        {
        ...
        }


       Why is the setup method in listing 7.10 less maintainable? Because, to
       read the tests for the first time and understand why they break, you
       need to do the following:
       1   Go through the setup method to understand what is being initialized.
       2   Assume that objects in the setup method are used in all tests.
       3   Find out later you were wrong, and read the tests again more care-
           fully to see which test uses the objects that may be causing the prob-
           lems.
       4   Dive deeper into the test code for no good reason, taking more time
           and effort to understand what the code does.
       Always consider the readers of your tests when writing the tests. Imag-
       ine this is the first time they read them. Make sure they don’t get angry.
Having setup code that’s long and hard to understand
       Because the setup method provides only one place in the test to initial-
       ize things, developers tend to initialize many things, which inevitably is
       cumbersome to read and understand. One solution is to refactor the
       calls to initialize specific things into helper methods that are called from
       the setup method. This means that refactoring the setup method is usu-
       ally a good idea; the more readable it is, the more readable your test
       class will be.
       But there’s a fine line between over-refactoring and readability. Over-
       refactoring can lead to less readable code. This is a matter of personal
       preference. You need to watch for when your code is becoming less
       readable. I recommend getting feedback from a partner during the



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                       Writing maintainable tests       191




        refactoring. We all can become too enamored with code we’ve written,
        and having a second pair of eyes involved in refactoring can lead to good
        and objective results. Having a peer do a code review (a test review)
        after the fact is also good, but not as productive as doing it as it happens.
Setting up mocks and fakes in the setup method
        It’s not always a bad idea to use the setup method to create mocks and
        fake objects, but it’s important that only those mocks and fakes that are
        used in all the tests in the class are initialized in the setup method, or it
        will become hard to read and maintain.
        My preference is to have each test create its own mocks and stubs by
        calling helper methods within the test, so that the reader of the test
        knows exactly what is going on, without needing to jump from test to
        setup to understand the full picture.

7.2.4   Enforcing test isolation
        The lack of test isolation is the biggest single cause of test blockage I’ve
        seen while consulting and working on unit tests. The basic concept is
        that a test should always run in its own little world, isolated from even
        the knowledge that other tests out there may do similar or different things.

          The test that cried “fail”
          One project I was involved in had unit tests behaving strangely, and they
          got even stranger as time went on. A test would fail and then suddenly
          pass for a couple of days straight. A day later, it would fail, seemingly
          randomly, and other times it would pass even if code was changed to
          remove or change its behavior. It got to the point where developers
          would tell each other, “Ah, it’s OK. If it sometimes passes, that means it
          passes.”

          It turned out that the test was calling out a different test as part of its
          code, and when the other test failed, it would break the first test.

          It only took us three days to figure this out, after spending a month liv-
          ing with the situation. When we finally had the test working correctly, we
          discovered that we had a bunch of real bugs in our code that we were
          ignoring because we were getting what we thought were false positives
          from the failing test. The story of the boy who cried “wolf” holds true
          even in development.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
192    CHAPTER 7       The pillars of good tests




       When tests aren’t isolated well, they can step on each other’s toes
       enough to make you miserable, making you regret deciding to try unit
       testing on the project, and promising yourself never again. I’ve seen
       this happen. We don’t bother looking for problems in the tests, so when
       there’s a problem with the tests, it can take a lot of time to find it.
       There are several test “smells” that can hint at broken test isolation:
       ❂   Constrained test order—Tests expecting to be run in a specific order or
         expecting information from other test results
       ❂ Hidden test call—Tests calling other tests

       ❂ Shared-state corruption—Tests sharing in-memory state without rolling

         back
       ❂ External-shared-state corruption—Integration tests with shared resources

         and no rollback
       Let’s look at these simple anti-patterns.
Anti-pattern: constrained test order

       This problem arises when tests are coded to expect a specific state in
       memory, in an external resource, or in the current test class—a state
       that was created by running other tests in the same class before the
       current test. The problem is that most test platforms (including NUnit,
       JUnit, and MbUnit) don’t guarantee that tests will run in a specific
       order, so what passes today may fail tomorrow.
       For example, listing 7.11 shows a test against LogAnalyzer that expects
       that an earlier test had already called Initialize().

       Listing 7.11 Constrained test order: the second test will fail if it runs first

       [TestFixture]
        public class IsolationsAntiPatterns
        {
           private LogAnalyzer logan;
          [Test]
           public void CreateAnalyzer_BadFileName_ReturnsFalse()
           {
               logan = new LogAnalyzer();
               logan.Initialize();




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                               Writing maintainable tests   193




          bool valid = logan.IsValid("abc");
          Assert.That(valid, Is.False);
    }

    [Test]
     public void CreateAnalyzer_GoodFileName_ReturnsTrue()
     {
         bool valid = logan.IsValid("abcdefg");
         Assert.That(valid, Is.True);
     }
}


A myriad of problems can occur when tests don’t enforce isolation.
Here’s a short list:
❂ A test may suddenly start breaking when a new version of the test
  framework is introduced that runs the tests in a different order.
❂ Running a subset of the tests may produce different results than run-

  ning all the tests or a different subset of the tests.
❂ Maintaining the tests is more cumbersome, because you need to

  worry about how other tests relate to particular tests and how each
  one affects state.
❂ Your tests may fail or pass for the wrong reasons; for example, a dif-

  ferent test may have failed or passed before it, leaving the resources
  in an unknown state.
❂ Removing or changing some tests may affect the outcomes of other

  tests.
❂ It’s difficult to name your tests appropriately because they test more

  than a single thing.
There are a couple of common patterns that lead to poor test isolation:
❂   Flow testing—A developer writes tests that must run in a specific order
  so that they can test flow execution, a big use case composed of
  many actions, or a full integration test where each test is one step in
  that full test.
❂ Laziness in cleanup—A developer is lazy and doesn’t return any state

  her test may have changed back to its original form, and other devel-



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
194    CHAPTER 7      The pillars of good tests




         opers write tests that depend on this symptom, knowingly or
         unknowingly.
       These problems can be solved in various manners:
       ❂   Flow testing—Instead of writing flow-related tests in unit tests (long-
         running use cases, for example), consider using some sort of integra-
         tion testing framework like FIT or FitNesse, or QA-related products
         such as AutomatedQA, WinRunner, and the like.
       ❂ Laziness in cleanup—If you’re too lazy to clean up your database after

         testing, your filesystem after testing, or your memory-based objects,
         consider moving to a different profession. This isn’t a job for you.
Anti-pattern: hidden test call
       In this anti-pattern, tests contain one or more direct calls to other tests
       in the same class or other test classes, which causes tests to depend on
       one another. For example, listing 7.12 shows the CreateAnalyzer_Good
       NameAndBadNameUsage test calling a different test at the end, creating a
       dependency between the tests and breaking both of them as isolated
       units.
       Listing 7.12 One test calling another breaks isolation and introduces a dependency

           [TestFixture]
       public class HiddenTestCall
       {
           private LogAnalyzer logan;
          [Test]
           public void CreateAnalyzer_GoodNameAndBadNameUsage()
           {
               logan = new LogAnalyzer();
               logan.Initialize();
               bool valid = logan.IsValid("abc");
               Assert.That(valid, Is.False);

                  CreateAnalyzer_GoodFileName_ReturnsTrue();
            }

           [Test]
            public void CreateAnalyzer_GoodFileName_ReturnsTrue()
            {




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                             Writing maintainable tests   195




           bool valid = logan.IsValid("abcdefg");
           Assert.That(valid, Is.True);
     }
}


This type of dependency can cause several problems:
❂ Running a subset of the tests may produce different results than run-
  ning all the tests or a different subset of the tests.
❂ Maintaining the tests is more cumbersome, because you need to

  worry about how other tests relate to particular tests and how and
  when they call each other.
❂ Tests may fail or pass for the wrong reasons. For example, a differ-

  ent test may have failed, thus failing your test or not calling it at all.
  Or a different test may have left some shared variables in an
  unknown state.
❂ Changing some tests may affect the outcome of other tests.

❂ It’s difficult to clearly name tests that call other tests.

Here are a few causes for this problem:
❂   Flow testing—A developer writes tests that need to run in a specific
  order so that they can test flow execution, a big use case composed
  of many actions, or a full integration test where each test is one step
  in that full test.
❂ Trying to remove duplication—A developer tries to remove duplication in

  the tests by calling other tests (which have code they don’t want the
  current test to repeat).
❂ Laziness in separating the tests—A developer is lazy and doesn’t take the

  time to create a separate test and refactor the code appropriately,
  instead taking a shortcut and calling a different test.
Here are some solutions for those problems:
❂   Flow testing—Instead of writing flow-related tests in unit tests (long-
    running use cases, for example), consider using some sort of integra-
    tion testing framework like FIT or FitNesse, or QA-related products
    such as AutomatedQA, WinRunner, and the like.



         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
196    CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




       ❂   Trying to remove duplication—Don’t ever remove duplication by calling
         another test from a test. You’re preventing that test from relying on
         the setup and teardown methods in the class and are essentially run-
         ning two tests in one (because the calling test has an assertion as
         well as the test being called). Instead, refactor the code you don’t
         want to write twice into a third method that both your test and the
         other test call.
       ❂ Laziness in separating the tests—If you’re too lazy to separate your tests,

         think of all the extra work you’ll have to do if you don’t separate
         them. Try to imagine a world where the current test you’re writing is
         the only test in the system, so it can’t rely on any other test.
Anti-pattern: shared-state corruption
       This anti-pattern manifests in two major ways, independent of each
       other:
       ❂ Tests touch shared resources (either in memory or in external
         resources, such as databases, filesystems, and so on) without clean-
         ing up or rolling back any changes they make to those resources.
       ❂ Tests don’t set up the initial state they need before they start run-

         ning, relying on the state to be there.
       Either of these situations will cause the symptoms we’ll look at shortly.
       The problem is that tests rely on specific state to have consistent pass/
       fail behavior. If a test doesn’t control the state it expects, or other tests
       corrupt that state for whatever reason, the test can’t run properly or
       report the correct result consistently.
       For example, assume we have a Person class with simple features: it has
       a list of phone numbers and the ability to search for a number by spec-
       ifying the beginning of the number. Listing 7.13 shows a couple of tests
       that don’t clean up or set up a Person object instance correctly.
       Listing 7.13 Shared-state corruption by a test

       [TestFixture]
        public class SharedStateCorruption
        {                                                      Defines shared
            Person person = new Person();                      Person state




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                Writing maintainable tests   197




      [Test]
       public void CreateAnalyzer_GoodFileName_ReturnsTrue()
       {
           person.AddNumber("055-4556684(34)");
           string found =
                                                           ? Changes
                                                             shared state
           person.FindPhoneStartingWith("055");
           Assert.AreEqual("055-4556684(34)", found);
       }

      [Test]
       public void FindPhoneStartingWith_NoNumbers_ReturnsNull()
       {
           string found =
                 person.FindPhoneStartingWith("0");          Reads
           Assert.IsNull(found);                             shared state
       }
 }


In this example, the second test (expecting a null return value) will fail
because the previous test has already added a number ? to the Person
instance.
This type of problem causes a number of symptoms:
❂ Running a subset of the tests may produce different results than run-
  ning all the tests or a different subset of the tests.
❂ Maintaining the test is more cumbersome, because you may break

  the state for other tests, breaking those tests without realizing it.
❂ Your test may fail or pass for the wrong reason; for example, a differ-

  ent test may have failed or passed before it, leaving the shared state
  in a problematic condition, or it may not have cleaned up after it ran.
❂ Changing some tests may affect the outcomes of other tests, seem-

  ingly randomly.
Here are a few causes of this problem:
❂    Not setting up state before each test—A developer doesn’t set up the state
  required for the test, or assumes the state was already correct.
❂ Using shared state—A developer uses shared memory or external

  resources for more than one test without taking precautions.



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
198     CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




        ❂   Using static instances in tests—A developer sets static state that’s used in
         other tests.
        Here are some solutions:
        ❂   Not setting up state before each test—This is a mandatory practice when
          writing unit tests. Use either a setup method or call specific helper
          methods at the beginning of the test to ensure the state is what you
          expect it to be.
        ❂ Using shared state—In many cases, you don’t need to share state at all.

          Having separate instances of an object for each test is the safest way
          to go.
        ❂ Using static instances in tests—You need to be careful how your tests

          manage static state. Be sure to clean up the static state using setup or
          teardown methods. Sometimes it’s effective to use direct helper
          method calls to clearly reset the static state from within the test. If
          you’re testing singletons, it’s worth adding public or internal setters
          so your tests can reset them to a clean object instance.
Anti-pattern: external-shared-state corruption
        This anti-pattern is similar to the in-memory state corruption pattern,
        but it happens in integration-style testing:
        ❂ Tests touch shared resources (either in memory or in external

          resources, such as databases, filesystems, and so on) without clean-
          ing up or rolling back any changes they make to those resources.
        ❂ Tests don’t set up the initial state they need before they start run-

          ning, relying on the state to be there.
        Now that we’ve looked at isolating tests, let’s manage our asserts to
        make sure we get the full story when a test fails.

7.2.5   Avoiding multiple asserts
        To understand the problem of multiple asserts, let’s take a look at the
        example in listing 7.14.
        Listing 7.14 A test that contains multiple asserts

        [Test]
         public void CheckVariousSumResults()
         {




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                   Writing maintainable tests   199




       Assert.AreEqual(3, Sum(1001, 1, 2));
       Assert.AreEqual(3, Sum(1, 1001, 2));
       Assert.AreEqual(3, Sum(1, 2, 1001));
 }


There’s more than one test in this test method. The author of the test
method tried to save some time by including three tests as three simple
asserts. What’s the problem here? When asserts fail, they throw excep-
tions. (In NUnit’s case, they throw a special AssertException that’s
caught by the NUnit test runner, which understands this exception as
a signal that the current test method has failed.) Once an assert clause
throws an exception, no other line executes in the test method. That
means that, if the first assert in listing 7.14 failed, the other two assert
clauses would never execute.
There are several ways to achieve the same goal:
❂ Create a separate test for each assert.
❂ Use parameterized tests.

❂ Wrap the assert call with try-catch.




     Why does it matter if some asserts aren’t executed?
     If only one assert fails, you never know if the other asserts in that same
     test method would have failed or not. You may think you know, but it’s
     an assumption until you can prove it with a failing or passing assert.
     When people see only part of the picture, they tend to make a judgment
     call about the state of the system, which can turn out wrong. The more
     information you have about all the asserts that have failed or passed,
     the better equipped you are to understand where in the system a bug
     may lie, and where it doesn’t.

     I’ve gone on wild goose chases hunting for bugs that weren’t there be-
     cause only one assert out of several failed. Had I bothered to check
     whether the other asserts failed or passed, I might have realized that the
     bug was in a different location.

     Sometimes people go and find bugs that they think are real, but when
     they “fix” them, the assert that previously failed passes and the other
     asserts in that test fail (or continue to fail). Sometimes you can’t see the




        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
200    CHAPTER 7      The pillars of good tests




          full problem, so fixing part of it can introduce new bugs into the system,
          which will only be discovered after you’ve uncovered each assert’s re-
          sult.

          That’s why it’s important that all the asserts have a chance to run, even
          if other asserts have failed before. In most cases, that means putting
          single asserts in tests.


Refactoring into multiple tests
       Multiple asserts are really multiple tests without the benefit of test iso-
       lation; a failing test causes the other asserts (tests) to not execute.
       Instead, we can create separate test methods with meaningful names
       that represent each test case. Listing 7.15 shows an example of refac-
       toring from the code from listing 7.14.
       Listing 7.15 A refactored test class with three different tests

       [Test]
        public void Sum_1001AsFirstParam_Returns3()
        {
            Assert.AreEqual(3, Sum(1001, 1, 2));
        }

       [Test]
        public void Sum_1001AsMiddleParam_Returns3()
        {
            Assert.AreEqual(3, Sum(1, 1001, 2));
        }

       [Test]
        public void Sum_1001AsThirdParam_Returns3()
        {
            Assert.AreEqual(3, Sum(1, 2, 1001));
        }


       As you can see, the refactoring in listing 7.15 gives us three separate
       tests, each with a slightly different name indicating how we’re testing
       the unit. The benefit is that, if one of those tests fails, the others will
       still run. Unfortunately, this is too verbose, and most developers would
       feel this refactoring is overkill for the benefit. Although I disagree that



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         Writing maintainable tests   201




      it’s overkill (it took about 20 seconds of work to get the benefit), I
      agree that the verbosity is an issue. It’s an issue because developers
      won’t do it, and we end up with our original problem.
      That’s why many unit-testing frameworks, including MbUnit and
      NUnit, have a custom attribute you can use that achieves the same goal
      with much more concise syntax.
Using parameterized tests
      Both MbUnit and NUnit support the notion of parameterized tests
      using a special attribute called [RowTest]. Listing 7.16 shows how you
      can use the [RowTest] and [Row] attributes (found in NUnit.Exten-
      sions.dll under the NUnit bin directory) to run the same test with dif-
      ferent parameters in a single test method. Notice that, when you use
      the [RowTest] attribute, it replaces the [Test] attribute in NUnit.
      Listing 7.16 A refactored test class using parameterized tests

      [RowTest]
      [Row(1001,1,2,3)]
      [Row(1,1001,2,3)]
      [Row(1,2,1001,3)]
       public void SumTests(int x,int y, int z,int expected)
       {
          Assert.AreEqual(expected, Sum(x, y, z));
       }


      NOTE      To use [RowTest] in NUnit, you’ll need to add a reference to
                NUnit.Extensions.dll, which is found in the bin directory of NUnit’s
                installation folder.
      Parameterized test methods in NUnit and MbUnit are different from
      regular tests in that they can take parameters. They also expect at least
      one [RowTest] attribute to be placed on top of the current method
      instead of a regular [Test] attribute. The attribute takes any number of
      parameters, which are then mapped at runtime to the parameters that
      the test method expects in its signature.
      The example in listing 7.16 expects four arguments. We call an assert
      method with the first three parameters, and use the last one as the



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
202     CHAPTER 7      The pillars of good tests




        expected value. This gives us a declarative way of creating a single test
        with different inputs.
        The best thing about this is that, if one of the [RowTest] attributes fails,
        the other attributes are still executed by the test runner, so we see the
        full picture of pass/fail states in all tests.
Wrapping with try-catch
        Some people think it’s a good idea to use a try-catch block for each
        assert to catch and write its exception to the console, and then continue
        to the next statement, bypassing the problematic nature of exceptions
        in tests. I think using parameterized tests is a far better way of achiev-
        ing the same thing. Use parameterized tests instead of try-catch
        around multiple asserts.
        Now that we know how to avoid multiple asserts acting as multiple
        tests, let’s look at multiple asserts being used to test multiple aspects of
        a single object.

7.2.6   Avoiding testing multiple aspects of the same object
        Let’s look at another example of a test with multiple asserts, but this
        time it’s not trying to act as multiple tests in one test, it’s trying to check
        multiple aspects of the same state. If even one aspect fails, we need to
        know about it. Listing 7.17 shows such a test.
        Listing 7.17 Testing multiple aspects of the same object in one test

        [Test]
         public void
           Analyze_SimpleStringLine_UsesDefaulTabDelimiterToParseFields()
         {
             LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer();
             AnalyzedOutput output =
                 log.Analyze("10:05\tOpen\tRoy");

             Assert.AreEqual(1,output.LineCount);
             Assert.AreEqual("10:05",output.GetLine(1)[0]);
             Assert.AreEqual("Open",output.GetLine(1)[1]);
             Assert.AreEqual("Roy",output.GetLine(1)[2]);
         }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                          Writing maintainable tests   203




       This example is testing that the parse output from the LogAnalyzer
       worked by testing each field in the result object separately. They
       should all work, or the test should fail.
Making tests more maintainable
       Listing 7.18 shows a way to refactor the test from listing 7.17 so that
       it’s easier to read and maintain.
       Listing 7.18 Comparing objects instead of using multiple asserts

       [Test]
        public void
          Analyze_SimpleStringLine_UsesDefaulTabDelimiterToParseFields2()
        {
            LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer();
            AnalyzedOutput expected = new AnalyzedOutput();               Sets up
            expected.AddLine("10:05", "Open", "Roy");                     an expected
                                                                          object
            AnalyzedOutput output =
                log.Analyze("10:05\tOpen\tRoy");            Compares
                                                            expected and
            Assert.AreEqual(expected,output);               actual objects
        }


       Instead of adding multiple asserts, we can create a full object to com-
       pare against, set all the properties that should be on that object, and
       compare the result and the expected object in one assert. The advan-
       tage of this approach is that it’s much easier to understand what we’re
       testing and to recognize that this is one logical block that should be
       passing, not many separate tests.
       Note that, for this kind of testing, the objects being compared must
       override the Equals() method, or the comparison between the objects
       won’t work. Some people find this an unacceptable compromise. I use
       it from time to time, but am happy to go either way. Use your own dis-
       cretion.
Overriding ToString()
       Another approach you might try is to override the ToString() method
       of compared objects so that, if tests fail, you’ll get more meaningful



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
204   CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




      error messages. For example, here’s the output of the test in listing 7.18
      when it fails.

      TestCase 'AOUT.CH7.LogAn.Tests.MultipleAsserts
      .Analyze_SimpleStringLine_UsesDefaulTabDelimiterToParseFields2'
      failed:
        Expected: <AOUT.CH789.LogAn.AnalyzedOutput>
        But was: <AOUT.CH789.LogAn.AnalyzedOutput>
          C:\GlobalShare\InSync\Book\Code\ARtOfUniTesting
                    \LogAn.Tests\MultipleAsserts.cs(41,0):
      at AOUT.CH7.LogAn.Tests.MultipleAsserts
      .Analyze_SimpleStringLine_UsesDefaulTabDelimiterToParseFields2()


      Not very helpful, is it?
      By implementing ToString() in both the AnalyzedOutput class and the
      LineInfo class (which are part of the object model being compared), we
      can get more readable output from the tests. Listing 7.19 shows the two
      implementations of the ToString() methods in the classes under test,
      followed by the resulting test output.
      Listing 7.19 Implementing ToString() in compared classes for cleaner output

      ///Overriding ToString inside The AnalyzedOutput Object//////////////
              public override string ToString()
              {
                  StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder();
                  foreach (LineInfo line in lines)
                  {
                      sb.Append(line.ToString());
                  }
                  return sb.ToString();
              }

      ///Overriding ToString inside each LineInfo Object//////////////
              public override string ToString()
              {
                  StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder();
                  for (int i = 0; i < this.fields.Length; i++)
                  {
                      sb.Append(this[i]);
                      sb.Append(",");
                  }




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                       Writing maintainable tests   205




                    return sb.ToString();
                }

        ///TEST OUTPUT//////////////
        ------ Test started: Assembly: er.dll ------

        TestCase 'AOUT.CH7.LogAn.Tests.MultipleAsserts
        .Analyze_SimpleStringLine_UsesDefaulTabDelimiterToParseFields2'
        failed:
          Expected: <10:05,Open,Roy,>
          But was: <>
            C:\GlobalShare\InSync\Book\Code\ARtOfUniTesting
        \LogAn.Tests\MultipleAsserts.cs(41,0):
        at AOUT.CH7.LogAn.Tests.MultipleAsserts
        .Analyze_SimpleStringLine_UsesDefaulTabDelimiterToParseFields2()


        Now the test output is much clearer, and we can understand that we
        got very different objects. Clearer output makes it easier to understand
        why the test fails and makes for easier maintenance.
        Another way tests can become hard to maintain is when we make them
        too fragile by overspecification.

7.2.7   Avoiding overspecification in tests
        An overspecified test is one that contains assumptions about how a spe-
        cific unit under test should implement its behavior, instead of only
        checking that the end behavior is correct.
        Here are some ways unit tests are often overspecified:
        ❂ A test specifies purely internal behavior for an object under test.
        ❂ A test uses mocks when using stubs would be enough.

        ❂ A test assumes specific order or exact string matches when it isn’t

          required.
        TIP   This topic is also discussed in xUnit Test Patterns by Gerard Meszaros.
        Let’s look at some examples of overspecified tests.
Specifying purely internal behavior
        Listing 7.20 shows a test against LogAnalyzer’s Initialize() method
        that tests internal state, and no outside functionality.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
206   CHAPTER 7      The pillars of good tests




      Listing 7.20 An overspecified test that tests a purely internal behavior

      [Test]
       public void Initialize_WhenCalled_SetsDefaultDelimiterIsTabDelimiter()
       {
          LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer();

           Assert.AreEqual(null,log.GetInternalDefaultDelimiter());
           log.Initialize();
           Assert.AreEqual('\t', log.GetInternalDefaultDelimiter());
       }


      This test is overspecified because it only tests the internal state of
      the LogAnalyzer object. Because this state is internal, it could change
      later on.
      Unit tests should be testing the public contract and public functionality
      of an object. In this example, the tested code isn’t part of any public
      contract or interface.
Using mocks instead of stubs
      Using mocks instead of stubs is a common mistake. Let’s look at an
      example.
      Listing 7.21 shows a test that uses mocks to assert the interaction
      between LogAnalyzer and a provider it uses to read a text file. The test
      wrongly checks that LogAnalyzer calls the provider correctly to read
      the file’s text (an implementation detail that could change later and
      break our test). Instead, the test could use a stub to return the fake
      results from the text file, and assert against the public output of the
      LogAnalyzer’s method, which makes for a more robust, less brittle test.

      Listing 7.21 shows the method we want to test, followed by an over-
      specified test for that code.

      Listing 7.21 An overspecified test that uses mocks when stubs would do fine

      public AnalyzeResults AnalyzeFile(string fileName)
          {
              int lineCount = logReader.GetLineCount();
              string text = "";




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                            Writing maintainable tests   207




          for (int i = 0; i < lineCount; i++)
          {
              text += logReader.GetText(fileName, i, i);
          }
          return new AnalyzeResults(text);
    }
//////////////////////////the test/////////////////
   [Test]
    public void AnalyzeFile_FileWith3Lines_CallsLogProvider3Times()
    {
         MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
        ILogProvider mockLog = mocks.CreateMock<ILogProvider>();
        LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(mockLog);
        using(mocks.Record())
        {
            mockLog.GetLineCount();
            LastCall.Return(3);

              mockLog.GetText("someFile.txt", 1, 1);
              LastCall.Return("a");

              mockLog.GetText("someFile.txt", 2, 2);
              LastCall.Return("b");

              mockLog.GetText("someFile.txt", 3, 3);
              LastCall.Return("c");
          }
          AnalyzeResults results = log.AnalyzeFile("someFile.txt");
          mocks.VerifyAll();
    }


The test in listing 7.21 is overspecified because it tests the interaction
between the interface of some LogReader (which reads text files) and
the LogAnalzyer object. This means it’s testing the underlying reading
algorithm inside the method under test, instead of testing for an
expected result from the method under test. The test should let the
method under test run its own internal algorithms, and test the results.
By doing that, we make the test less brittle.
Listing 7.22 shows a modified test that only checks the outcome of the
operation.



        Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
208   CHAPTER 7      The pillars of good tests




      Listing 7.22 Replacing mocks with stubs and checking outputs instead of interactions

      [Test]
       public void
         AnalyzeFile_With3Lines_CallsLog3TimesLessBrittle()
       {
           MockRepository mocks = new MockRepository();
           ILogProvider stubLog = mocks.Stub<ILogProvider>();
           using(mocks.Record())
           {
               SetupResult.For(stubLog.GetText("", 1, 1))
                   .IgnoreArguments()                         Stubs unknown
                   .Repeat.Any()                              number of calls
                   .Return("a");

                SetupResult.For(stubLog.GetLineCount()).Return(3);
            }
            using(mocks.Playback())
            {
                LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer(stubLog);
               AnalyzeResults results = log.AnalyzeFile("someFile.txt");

                Assert.That(results.Text,Is.EqualTo("aaa"));
            }
                                                                            ? Asserts on
                                                                              end result
       }


      The important thing about this test is that the end assert ? is against
      the end result, and it doesn’t care how many times the internal Get-
      Text() method is called. We also use a stub that doesn’t care how many
      times it gets called, and it always returns the same result. This test is
      much less fragile, and it tests the right thing.
      NOTE        When you refactor internal state to be visible to an outside test,
                  could it be considered a code smell (a sign that something might be
                  wrong in the code’s design or logic)? It’s not a code smell when
                  you’re refactoring to expose collaborators. It’s a code smell if you’re
                  refactoring and there are no collaborators (so you don’t need to stub
                  or mock anything).
      I am using NUnit’s Assert.That syntax instead of Assert.AreEqual
      because the fluent nature of the new syntax is much cleaner and nicer
      to work with.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                          Writing readable tests    209




      TIP   Also notice that this test has no mock objects, only stubs. The assert is
            done against a return value, and a stub is used internally to simulate
            some scenario. This is often the way I like to write my tests. In fact, less
            than 10 percent of the tests I write have any mock objects. Most tests
            will have stubs, and nothing more.

      One more way developers tend to overspecify their tests is the overuse
      of assumptions.
Assuming an order or exact match when it’s not needed

      Another common pattern people tend to repeat is to have asserts
      against hardcoded strings in the unit’s return value or properties, when
      only a specific part of a string is necessary. Ask yourself, “Can I use
      string.Contains() rather than string.Equals()?”

      The same goes for collections and lists. It’s much better to make sure a
      collection contains an expected item than to assert that the item is in a
      specific place in a collection (unless that’s specifically what is expected).
      By making these kinds of small adjustments, you can guarantee that, as
      long as the string or collection contains what is expected, the test will
      pass. Even if the implementation or order of the string or collection
      changes, you won’t have to go back and change every little character
      you add to a string.
      Now let’s cover the third and final pillar of good unit tests: readability.


 7.3 Writing readable tests
      Readability is so important that, without it, the tests we write are
      almost meaningless. From giving good names to the tests to having
      good assert messages, readability is the connecting thread between the
      person who wrote the test and the poor soul who has to read it a few
      months later. Tests are stories we tell the next generation of program-
      mers on a project. They allow a developer to see exactly what an appli-
      cation is made of and where it started.
      This section is all about making sure the developers who come after
      you will be able to maintain the production code and the tests that you



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
210     CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




        write, while understanding what they’re doing and where they should
        be doing it.
        There are several facets to readability:
        ❂ Naming unit tests
        ❂ Naming variables

        ❂ Creating good assert messages

        ❂ Separating asserts from actions


        Let’s go through these one by one.

7.3.1   Naming unit tests
        Naming standards are important because they give us comfortable
        rules and templates that outline what we should explain about the test.
        The test name has three parts:
        The name of the method being tested—This is essential, so that you can easily
        see where the tested logic is. Having this as the first part of the test
        name allows easy navigation and as-you-type intellisense (if your IDE
        supports it) in the test class.
        The scenario under which it’s being tested—This part gives us the “with” part of
        the name: “When I call method X with a null value, then it should do Y.”
        ❂   The expected behavior when the scenario is invoked—This part specifies in
           plain English what the method should do or return, or how it should
           behave, based on the current scenario: “When I call method X with a
           null value, then it should do Y.”
        Removing even one of these parts from a test name can cause the reader
        of the test to wonder what is going on, and to start reading the test code.
        Our main goal is to release the next developer from the burden of read-
        ing the test code in order to understand what the test is testing.
        A common way to write these three parts of the test name is to separate
        them with underscores, like this: MethodUnderTest_Scenario_Behavior().
        Listing 7.23 shows a test that uses this naming convention.




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                           Writing readable tests   211




        Listing 7.23 A test with three parts in its name

        [Test]
         public void
           AnalyzeFile_FileWith3LinesAndFileProvider_ReadsFileUsingProvider()
         {
         //...
         }


        The method in listing 7.23 tests the AnalyzeFile method, giving it a file
        with three lines and a file-reading provider, and expects it to use the
        provider to read the file.
        If developers stick to this naming convention, it will be easy for other
        developers to jump in and understand tests.

7.3.2   Naming variables
        How you name variables in unit tests is as important as, or even more
        important than, variable-naming conventions in production code.
        Apart from their chief function of testing, tests also serve as a form of
        documentation for an API. By giving variables good names, we can
        make sure that people reading our tests understand what we’re trying
        to prove as quickly as possible (as opposed to understanding what we’re
        trying to accomplish when writing production code).
        Listing 7.24 shows an example of a poorly named and poorly written
        test. I call this “unreadable” in the sense that I can’t figure out what this
        test is about.
        Listing 7.24 An unreadable test name

        [Test]
         public void BadlyNamedTest()
         {
            LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer();
            int result= log.GetLineCount("abc.txt");
            Assert.AreEqual(-100,result);
         }




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
212     CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




        In this instance, the assert is using some magic number (-100) (a num-
        ber that represents some value the developer needs to know). Because
        we don’t have a descriptive name for what the number is expected to
        be, we can only assume what it’s supposed to mean. The test name
        should have helped us a little bit here, but the test name needs more
        work, to put it mildly.
        Is -100 some sort of exception? Is it a valid return value? This is where
        we have a choice:
        ❂ We can change the design of the API to throw an exception instead
          of returning -100 (assuming -100 is some sort of illegal result value).
        ❂ We can compare the result to some sort of constant or aptly named

          variable, as shown in listing 7.25.
        Listing 7.25 A more readable version of the test

        [Test]
         public void BadlyNamedTest()
         {
            LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer();
            int result= log.GetLineCount("abc.txt");
            const int COULD_NOT_READ_FILE = -100;
            Assert.AreEqual(COULD_NOT_READ_FILE,result);
         }


        The code in listing 7.25 is much better, because we can easily under-
        stand the intent of the return value.
        The last part of a test is usually the assert, and we need to make the
        most out of the assert message. If the assert fails, the first thing the user
        will see is that message.

7.3.3   Asserting yourself with meaning
        Writing a good assert message is much like writing a good exception
        message. It’s easy to get it wrong without realizing it, and it makes a
        world of difference (and time) to the people who have to read it.
        There are several key points to remember when writing a message for
        an assert clause:



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Writing readable tests       213




❂  Don’t repeat what the built-in test framework outputs to the console.
❂ Don’t repeat what the test name explains.

❂ If you don’t have anything good to say, don’t say anything.

❂ Write what should have happened or what failed to happen, and

   possibly mention when it should have happened.
Listing 7.26 shows a bad example of an assert message and the output
it produces.
Listing 7.26 A bad assert message that repeats what the test framework outputs

[Test]
 public void BadAssertMessage()
 {
    LogAnalyzer log = new LogAnalyzer();
    int result= log.GetLineCount("abc.txt");
    const int COULD_NOT_READ_FILE = -100;
    Assert.AreEqual(COULD_NOT_READ_FILE,result,
             "result was {0} instead of {1}",
             result,COULD_NOT_READ_FILE);
 }

 //Running this would produce:
 TestCase 'AOUT.CH7.LogAn.Tests.Readable.BadAssertMessage'
 failed:
   result was -1 instead of -100
   Expected: -100
   But was: -1
     C:\GlobalShare\InSync\Book\Code
 \ARtOfUniTesting\LogAn.Tests\Readable.cs(23,0)
 : at AOUT.CH7.LogAn.Tests.Readable.BadAssertMessage()


As you can see, there’s a message that repeats. Our assert message
didn’t add anything except more words to read. It would have been
better to not output anything but instead have a better-named test. A
clearer assert message would be something like this:
    Calling GetLineCount() for a non-existing file should have returned
      a COULD_NOT_READ_FILE.

Now that your assert messages are understandable, it’s time to make
sure that the assert happens on a different line than the method call.



       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
214     CHAPTER 7     The pillars of good tests




7.3.4   Separating asserts from actions
        This is a short section, but an important one nonetheless. For the sake
        of readability, avoid writing the assert line and the method call in the
        same statement.
        Listing 7.27 shows a good example, and listing 7.28 shows a bad example.
        Listing 7.27 Separating the assert from the thing asserted improves readability

        [Test]
         public void BadAssertMessage()
         {
         //some code here
             int result= log.GetLineCount("abc.txt");
             Assert.AreEqual(COULD_NOT_READ_FILE,result);
         }


        Listing 7.28 Not separating the assert from the thing asserted makes reading difficult

        [Test]
         public void BadAssertMessage()
         {
            //some code here

        Assert.AreEqual(COULD_NOT_READ_FILE,log.GetLineCount("abc.txt"));
         }


        See the difference between the two examples? Listing 7.28 is much
        harder to read and understand in the context of a real test, because the
        call to the GetLineCount() method is inside the call to the assert message.

7.3.5   Setting up and tearing down
        Setup and teardown methods in unit tests can be abused to the point
        where the tests or the setup and teardown methods are unreadable.
        Usually the situation is worse in the setup method than the teardown
        method.
        Let’s look at one possible abuse. If you have mocks and stubs being set
        up in a setup method, that means they don’t get set up in the actual test.
        That, in turn, means that whoever is reading your test may not even



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                               Summary        215




   realize that there are mock objects in use, or what the expectations are
   from them in the test.
   It’s much more readable to initialize mock objects directly in the test
   itself, with all their expectations. If you’re worried about readability,
   you can refactor the creation of the mocks into a helper method, which
   each test calls. That way, whoever is reading the test will know exactly
   what is being set up instead of having to look in multiple places.
   TIP   I’ve several times written full test classes that didn’t have a setup
         method, only helper methods being called from each test, for the sake of
         maintainability. The class was still readable and maintainable.

7.4 Summary
   Few developers write tests that they can trust when they first start out
   writing unit tests. It takes some discipline and some imagination to
   make sure you’re doing things right. A test that you can trust is an elu-
   sive beast at first, but when you get it right, you’ll feel the difference
   immediately.
   Some ways of achieving this kind of trustworthiness involve keeping
   good tests alive and removing or refactoring away bad tests, and we
   discussed several such methods in this chapter. The rest of the chapter
   was about problems that can arise inside tests, such as logic, testing
   multiple things, ease of running, and so on. Putting all these things
   together can be quite an art form.
   If there’s one thing to take away from this chapter, it’s this: tests grow
   and change with the system under tests. The topic of writing maintain-
   able tests has not been covered much in the unit-testing and TDD liter-
   ature, but as I write, it’s starting to appear online in blogs and forums. I
   believe that this is the next step in the evolution of unit-testing tech-
   niques. The first step of acquiring the initial knowledge (what a unit
   test is, and how you write one) has been covered in many places. The
   second step involves refining the techniques to improve all aspects of
   the code we write, and looking into other factors, such as maintainabil-
   ity and readability. It’s this critical step that this chapter (and most of
   this book) focuses on.



         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
216   CHAPTER 7   The pillars of good tests




      In the end, it’s simple: readability goes hand in hand with maintainabil-
      ity and trustworthiness. People who can read your tests can under-
      stand them and maintain them, and they will also trust the tests when
      they pass. When this point is achieved, you’re ready to handle change,
      and to change the code when it needs changing, because you’ll know
      when things break.
      In the next chapters, we’ll take a broader look at what makes code test-
      able, how to design for testability, and how to refactor existing code
      into a testable state.




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                               Part 4

                         Design and process

    his part of the book covers the problems and techniques that you’ll

T   need when introducing unit testing to an existing organization or code.
    In chapter 8, we’ll deal with the tough issue of implementing unit test-
    ing in an organization, and cover techniques that can make your job
    easier. This chapter provides answers to some tough questions that are
    common when first implementing unit testing.
    In chapter 9, we’ll look common problems associated with legacy code
    and examine some tools for working with it.




         Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
8

Integrating unit testing
into the organization
    This chapter covers
            • Becoming an agent of change
            • Implementing change from the top down or from the bottom up
            • Preparing to answer the tough questions about unit testing




    s a consultant, I have helped several companies, big and small, integrate

A   test-driven development and unit testing into their organizational culture.
    Sometimes this has failed, but those companies that succeeded had
    several things in common. This chapter draws on stories from both camps
    as it looks at the following topics:
    ❂   Becoming the agent of change—The initial steps you should take before
      introducing any changes
    ❂ Ways to succeed—Things that contributed to successful changes in a pro-

      cess, based on my experience
    ❂ Ways to fail—Things that can destroy what you’re trying to do, also

      based on my experience
    ❂ Tough questions and answers—The most frequently asked questions when

      introducing unit testing to a team
    In any type of organization, changing people’s habits is more psychologi-
    cal than technical. People don’t like change, and change is usually accom-

                                        219



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
220     CHAPTER 8    Integrating unit testing into the organization




        panied with plenty of FUD (fear, uncertainty, and doubt) to go
        around. It won’t be a walk in the park for most people, as you’ll see in
        this chapter.

 8.1 Steps to becoming an agent of change
        If you’re going to be the agent of change in your organization, you
        should first accept that role. People will view you as the person responsi-
        ble for what’s happening, whether you want them to or not, and there’s
        no use in hiding. In fact, hiding can cause things to go awfully wrong.
        As you start to implement changes, people will start asking the tough
        questions that they care about. How much time will this “waste”?
        What does this mean for me as a QA engineer? How do we know it
        works? Be prepared to answer these questions. The answers to the
        most common questions are discussed in section 8.4. You’ll find that
        convincing other people inside the organization before you start mak-
        ing changes will help you immensely when you need to make tough
        decisions and answer those questions.
        Finally, someone will have to stay at the helm, making sure the changes
        don’t die for lack of momentum. That’s you. There are ways to keep
        things alive, as you’ll see in the next sections.

8.1.1   Be prepared for the tough questions
        Do your research. Read the answers at the end of this chapter, and
        look at the related resources. Read forums, mailing lists, and blogs, and
        consult with your peers. If you can answer your own tough questions,
        there’s a better chance you can answer someone else’s.

8.1.2   Convince insiders: champions and blockers
        Loneliness is a terrible thing, and not many things make you feel more
        alone in an organization than going against the current. If you’re the
        only one who thinks what you’re doing is a good idea, there’s little rea-
        son for anyone to make an effort to implement what you’re advocating.
        Consider who can help and hurt your efforts: the champions and
        blockers.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                         Steps to becoming an agent of change   221




Champions
      As you start pushing for change, identify the people you think are most
      likely to help in your quest. They will be your champions. They’re usu-
      ally early adopters, or people who have open enough minds to try the
      things you’re advocating. They may already be half convinced but are
      looking for an impetus to start the change. They may have even tried it
      and failed on their own.
      Approach them before anyone else and ask for their opinions on what
      you’re about to do. They may tell you some things that you hadn’t con-
      sidered: teams that might be good candidates to start with, or places
      where people are more accepting of such changes. They may even tell
      you what to watch out for from their own personal experience.
      By approaching them, you’re helping to ensure that they’re part of the
      process. People who feel part of the process usually try to help make it
      work. Make them your champions: ask them if they can help you and be
      the ones people can come to with questions. Prepare them for such events.
Blockers
      Next, identify the blockers. These are the people in the organization who
      are most likely to resist the changes you’re making. For example, a
      manager might object to adding unit tests, claiming that they will add
      too much time to the development effort and increase the amount of
      code that needs to be maintained. Make them part of the process
      instead of resistors of it by giving them (at least, those who are willing
      and able) an active role in the process.
      The reasons why people might resist particular changes vary, and
      answers to some of the possible objections are covered in section 8.4.
      Some people will be afraid for their jobs, and some will feel comfort-
      able with the way things are and object to any changes.
      Going to these people and detailing all the things they could have done
      better is often nonconstructive, as I’ve found out the hard way. People
      don’t like to be told what they don’t do well. Instead, ask those people
      to help you in the process by being in charge of defining coding stan-
      dards for unit tests, for example, or by doing code and test reviews
      with peers every other day. Or make them part of the team that



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
222     CHAPTER 8    Integrating unit testing into the organization




        chooses the course materials or outside consultants. You’ll have given
        them a new responsibility that will help them feel relied upon and rele-
        vant in the organization. They need to be part of the change or they
        will almost certainly take part in a mini-rebellion against it.

8.1.3   Identify possible entry points
        Identify where in the organization you can start implementing the
        changes. Most successful implementations take a steady route. Start
        with a pilot project in a small team, and see what happens. If all goes
        well, move on to other teams and other projects.
        Here are some tips that will help you along the way:
        ❂   Choose smaller teams
        ❂   Create subteams
        ❂   Consider project feasibility
        These tips can get you a long way in a mostly hostile environment.
Choose smaller teams
        Identifying possible teams to start with is usually easy. You’ll generally
        want a smaller team working on a lower profile project with low risks.
        If the risk is minimal, it’s easier to convince people to try your pro-
        posed changes.
        One caveat is that the team needs to have members who are open to
        changing the way they work and to learning new skills. Ironically, the
        people with less experience on a team are usually most likely to be open
        to change, and people with more experience tend to be more
        entrenched in their way of doing things. If you can find a team with an
        experienced leader who’s open to change, but that also includes less-
        experienced developers, it’s likely that team will offer less resistance.
        Go to the team and ask them their opinion on holding a pilot such as
        this. They will tell you if this is the right place to start or not.
Create subteams
        Another possible candidate for a pilot test is to form a subteam within
        an existing team. Almost every team will have a “black hole” component
        that needs to be maintained, and while it does many things right, it also


              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                            Ways to succeed   223




        has many bugs. Adding features for such a component is a tough task,
        and this kind of pain can drive people to experiment with a pilot project.
Consider project feasibility
        For a pilot project, make sure you’re not biting off more than you can
        chew. It takes more experience to run more difficult projects, so you
        might want to have at least two options—a complicated project and an
        easier project—so that you can choose between them.
        Now that you’re mentally prepared for the task at hand, it’s time to
        look at some things you can do to make sure it all goes smoothly (or
        that it goes at all).

 8.2 Ways to succeed
        There are two main ways an organization or team can start changing a
        process: bottom-up or top-down (and sometimes both). The two ways
        are very different, as you’ll see, and either could be the right approach
        for your team or company. There’s no one right way.
        As you proceed, you’ll need to learn how to convince management that
        your efforts should also be their efforts, or when it would be wise to
        bring in someone from outside to help. Making progress visible is
        important, as is setting clear goals that can be measured. Identifying
        and going around obstacles should also be high on your list. There are
        many battles that can be fought, and you need to choose the right ones.

8.2.1   Guerrilla implementation (bottom-up)
        Guerrilla-style implementation is all about starting out with a team, get-
        ting results, and only then convincing other people that the practices are
        worthwhile. Usually the drivers for guerrilla implementation are the
        team that’s tired of doing things the prescribed way. They set out to do
        things differently; they study things on their own and make changes
        happen. When the team shows results, other people in the organization
        may decide to start implementing similar changes in their own teams.
        In some cases, guerrilla-style implementation is a process adopted first
        by developers and then by management. At other times, it’s a process


              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
224     CHAPTER 8    Integrating unit testing into the organization




        advocated first by developers and then by management. The difference is
        that you can accomplish the first covertly, without the higher powers
        knowing about it. The latter is done in conjunction with management.
        It’s up to you to figure out which approach will work best. Sometimes
        the only way to change things is by covert operations. Avoid this if you
        can, but if there’s no other way and you’re sure the change is needed,
        you can just do it.
        Don’t take this as a recommendation to make a career-limiting move.
        Developers do things they didn’t ask permission for all the time: debug-
        ging code, reading email, writing code comments, creating flow dia-
        grams, and so on. These are all tasks developers do as a regular part of
        the job. The same goes for unit testing. Most developers already write
        tests of some sort (automated or not). The idea is to redirect that time
        spent on tests into something that will provide benefits in the long term.

8.2.2   Convincing management (top-down)
        The top-down move usually starts in one of two ways. A manager or a
        developer will start the process and start the rest of the organization
        moving in that direction, piece by piece. Or a midlevel manager may see
        a presentation, read a book (such as this one), or talk to a colleague
        about the benefits of specific changes to the way they work. Such a man-
        ager will usually initiate the process by giving a presentation to people in
        other teams, or even using his authority to make the change happen.

8.2.3   Getting an outside champion
        I highly recommend getting an outside person to help with the change.
        An outside consultant coming in to help with unit testing and related
        matters has advantages over someone who works in the company:
        ❂   Freedom to speak—A consultant can say things that people inside the
          company may not be willing to hear from someone who works there:
          (“The code integrity is bad,” “Your tests are unreadable,” and so on).
        ❂ Experience—A consultant will have more experience dealing with

          resistance from the inside, coming up with good answers to tough
          questions, and knowing which buttons to push to get things going.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                 Ways to succeed     225




        ❂   Dedicated time—For a consultant, this is her job. Unlike other employ-
            ees in the company who have better things to do than push for
            change (like writing software), the consultant does this full time and
            is dedicated to this purpose.

            Code integrity
            Code integrity is a term I use to describe the purpose behind a team’s de-
            velopment activities, in terms of code stability, maintainability, and
            feedback. Mostly, it means that the code does what it’s meant to do, and
            the team knows when it doesn’t.

            These practices are all part of code integrity:
            • Automated builds
            • Continuous integration
            • Unit testing and test-driven development
            • Code consistency and agreed standards for quality
            • Achieving shortest time possible to fix bugs (or make failing tests
              pass)

            Some consider these to be “values” of development, and you can find
            them in methodologies such as Extreme Programming, but I like to say,
            “We have good code integrity,” instead of saying that I think we’re doing
            all these things well.


        I’ve often seen a change break down because an overworked champion
        doesn’t have the time to dedicate to the process.

8.2.4   Making progress visible
        It’s important to keep the progress and status of the change visible.
        Hang whiteboards or posters up on walls in corridors or in the food-
        related areas where people congregate. The data displayed should be
        related to the goals you’re trying to achieve.
        For example, show the number of passing or failing tests in the last
        nightly build. Keep a chart showing which teams are already running
        an automated build process. Put up a Scrum burndown chart of itera-
        tion progress or a test-code-coverage report (as seen in figure 8.1) if
        that’s what you have your goals set to. (You can learn more about



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
226    CHAPTER 8    Integrating unit testing into the organization




       Scrum at www.controlchaos.com.) Put up contact details for yourself
       and all the champions so you can answer any questions that arise.
       You’re aiming to talk to two groups with these charts:




Figure 8.1 An example of a test-code-coverage report




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                Ways to succeed     227




        ❂   The group undergoing the change—People in this group will gain a greater
          feeling of accomplishment and pride as the charts (which are open to
          everyone) are updated, and they will feel more compelled to com-
          plete the process because it’s visible to others. They will also be able
          to keep track of how they’re doing compared to other groups. They
          may push harder knowing that another group implemented specific
          practices more quickly.
        ❂ Those in the organization who aren’t part of the process—You’re raising inter-

          est and curiosity among these people, triggering conversations and
          buzz, and creating a current that they can join if they choose.

8.2.5   Aiming for specific goals
        Without goals, the change will be hard to measure and to communicate
        to others. It will be a vague “something” that can easily be shut down at
        the first sight of trouble.
        Here are some goals you might want to consider:
        ❂   Increase the amount of test code coverage.
            A study by Boris Beizer showed that developers who write tests and
            don’t use code-coverage tools or other techniques to test code cover-
            age will be naively optimistic about the coverage they gained from
            the tests. Another study, from the book Peer Reviews in Software: A Prac-
            tical Guide, suggests that testing without code-coverage tools may only
            result in coverage of about 50 to 60 percent of the code. (There’s
            much anecdotal evidence that, by using TDD, one can get up to 95
            to 100 percent code coverage for logical code.)
            A simple goal to measure is the percentage of the code covered by the
            tests. The more coverage, the better chance of finding bugs. It’s not a
            silver bullet, though. One could easily have close to 100 percent code
            coverage with bad tests that don’t mean anything. Low coverage is a
            bad sign; high coverage is a possible sign that things are better.
        NOTE       The study by Boris Beizer is discussed in Mark Johnson’s article,
                   “Dr. Boris Beizer on software testing: an interview, part 1,” in The
                   Software QA Quarterly (summer 1994). The other study is discussed in
                   Karl Wiegers book, Peer Reviews in Software: A Practical Guide (Addi-
                   son-Wesley, 2002).



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
228     CHAPTER 8       Integrating unit testing into the organization




        ❂   Increase the amount of test code coverage relative to the amount of code churn.
            Some production systems will allow you to measure the amount of
            code churn—how many lines of code were changed between builds.
            The fewer lines of code changed, the fewer bugs you’re likely to have
            introduced into a system. Calculating this isn’t always practical, par-
            ticularly in systems where you do a lot of code generation as part of
            the build process, but this can be solved by ignoring generated code.
            One system that allows you to measure code churn is Microsoft’s
            Team System. (See Microsoft’s “Code Churn Perspective” article at
            http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms244698(VS.80).aspx.)
        ❂   Reduce the amount of bug reopening.
            It’s easy to fix one thing and mistakenly break something else. If this
            doesn’t happen often, it’s a sign that you’re able to fix things and
            maintain the system without breaking previous assumptions.
        ❂   Reduce the average bug-fixing time (the time from bug opened to bug closed).
            A system with good tests and coverage will usually allow you to fix
            things more quickly (assuming the tests are written in a maintainable
            manner). That, in turn, means better turnaround times, and release
            cycles that are less stressful.
        In his book Code Complete (Microsoft Press), Steve McConnell outlines
        several metrics you can use to test progress. They include the follow-
        ing, among others:
        ❂ The number of defects found per class by priority
        ❂ The number of defects per routine number of testing hours per bug

          found
        ❂ The average number of defects per test case

        I highly recommend reading chapter 22 of that book, which deals with
        developer testing.

8.2.6   Realizing that there will be hurdles
        There are always hurdles. Most will come from within the organiza-
        tional structure, and some will be technical. The technical ones are easier
        to fix, because it’s just a matter of finding the right solution. The organi-
        zational ones need care and attention and a psychological approach.



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                Ways to fail   229




        It’s important not to surrender to a feeling of temporary failure when
        an iteration goes bad, tests go slower than expected, and so on. It’s
        sometimes hard to get going, and you’ll need to persist for at least a
        couple of months to start feeling comfortable with the new process and
        to iron out all the kinks. Have management commit to continuing for at
        least three months even if things don’t go as planned. It’s important to
        get their agreement up front. You don’t want to be running around try-
        ing to convince people in the middle of a stressful first month.
        Now that we’ve looked at ways of ensuring things go right, let’s look at
        some things that can lead to failure.

 8.3 Ways to fail
        In the preface to this book, I talked about one project I was involved
        with that failed, partly because unit testing was not implemented cor-
        rectly. That’s one way you can fail a project. I’ve listed several others
        here, along with one that cost me that project, and some things that can
        be done about them.

8.3.1   Lack of a driving force
        In all the places where I’ve seen change fail, the lack of a driving force
        was the most powerful factor in play. Being a consistent driving force of
        change has its price. It will take time away from your normal job to teach
        others, help them, and wage internal political wars for change. You need
        to be willing to surrender the time you have for these tasks, or the
        change won’t happen. Bringing in an outside person, as mentioned in
        section 8.2.3, will help you in your quest for a consistent driving force.

8.3.2   Lack of political support
        If your boss explicitly tells you not to make the change, there isn’t a
        whole lot you can do, besides trying to convince management to see
        what you see. But sometimes the lack of support is much more subtle
        than that, and the trick is to realize that you are facing opposition.
        For example, you may be told, “Sure, go ahead and implement those
        tests. We’re adding 10 percent to your time to do this.” Anything below



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
230     CHAPTER 8    Integrating unit testing into the organization




        30 percent isn’t realistic for beginning a unit-testing effort. This is one
        way a manager may try to stop a trend—by choking it out of existence.
        First, you need to recognize that you’re facing opposition, but once you
        do, it’s easy to identify. When you tell them that their limitations aren’t
        realistic, you’ll be told, “So don’t do it.”

8.3.3   Bad implementations and first impressions
        If you’re planning to implement unit testing without prior knowledge
        of how to write good unit tests, do yourself one big favor: involve
        someone who has experience, and follow some best practices (such as
        those outlined in this book).
        I’ve seen developers jump into the deep water without a proper under-
        standing of what to do or where to start, and it’s not a good place to be.
        Not only will it take a huge amount of time to learn how to make
        changes that are acceptable for your situation, but you’ll also lose a lot
        of credibility along the way for starting out with a bad implementation.
        This can lead to the pilot project being shut down.
        If you read the preface of this book, you’ll know that this is what hap-
        pened to me. You only have a couple of months to get things up to
        speed and convince the higher-ups that you’re achieving results. Make
        that time count, and remove any risks that you can. If you don’t know
        how to write good tests, read a book or get a consultant. If you don’t
        know how to make your code testable, do the same. Don’t waste time
        reinventing testing methods you don’t have to.

8.3.4   Lack of team support
        If your team doesn’t support your efforts, it will be nearly impossible to
        succeed, because you’ll have a hard time consolidating your extra work
        on the new process with your regular work. You should strive to have
        your team be part of the new process, or at least not stop it.
        Talk to your team members about the changes. Getting their support
        one by one is sometimes a good way to start, but talking to them as a
        group about your efforts—and answering their hard questions—can




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Tough questions and answers    231




        also prove valuable. Whatever you do, don’t take the team’s support
        for granted. Make sure you know what you’re getting into; these are
        the people you have to work with on a daily basis.
        Regardless of how you proceed, you’re going to be asked some tough
        questions about unit testing. The following questions and answers will
        help prepare you for your discussions with people who can make or
        break your agenda for change.

 8.4 Tough questions and answers
        This section covers some questions I’ve come across in various places.
        They usually arise from the premise that implementing unit testing can
        hurt someone personally—a manager looking out for his deadlines or a
        QA employee looking out for her relevancy. Once you understand
        where a question is coming from, it’s important to address the issue,
        directly or indirectly. Otherwise, there will always be subtle resistance.

8.4.1   How much time will this add to the current process?
        Team leads, project managers, and clients are the ones who usually ask
        how much time unit testing will add to the process. They’re the people
        in the front lines in terms of timing.
        Let’s begin with some facts. Studies have shown that raising the overall
        code quality in a project can increase productivity and shorten sched-
        ules. How does this match up with the fact that writing tests makes cod-
        ing slower? Through maintainability and the ease of fixing bugs, mostly.
        NOTE      For studies on code quality and productivity, see Capers Jones, Pro-
                  gramming Productivity (McGraw-Hill, 1986) and his Software Assess-
                  ments, Benchmarks, and Best Practices (Addison-Wesley, 2000).

        When asking about time, team leads may really be asking, “What
        should I tell my project manager when we go way past our due date?”
        They may actually think the process is useful but are looking for
        ammunition for the upcoming battle. They may also be asking the
        question not in terms of the whole product, but in terms of specific fea-
        ture sets or functionality.




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
232      CHAPTER 8         Integrating unit testing into the organization




         A project manager or customer who asks about timing, on the other
         hand, will usually be talking in terms of full product releases.
         Because different people care about different scopes, the answers you
         give them may vary. For example, unit testing can double the time it
         takes to implement a specific feature, but the overall release date for
         the product may actually be reduced. To understand this, let’s look at a
         real example I was involved with.
A tale of two features
         A large company I consulted with wanted to implement unit testing
         into their process, beginning with a pilot project. The pilot consisted of
         a group of developers adding a new feature to a large existing applica-
         tion. The company’s main livelihood was in creating this large billing
         application and customizing parts of it for various clients. The com-
         pany had thousands of developers around the world.
         The following measures were taken to test the pilot’s success:
         ❂ The time the team took for each of the development stages

         ❂ The overall time for the project to be released to the client

         ❂ The number of bugs found by the client after the release


         The same statistics were collected for a similar feature created by a dif-
         ferent team for a different client. The two features were nearly the
         same size, and the teams were roughly at the same skill and experience
         level. Both tasks were customization efforts—one with unit tests, the
         other without. Table 8.1 shows the differences in time.
         Table 8.1 Team progress and output measured with and without tests

               Stage                        Team without tests                       Team with tests

 Implementation (coding)              7 days                                14 days

 Integration                          7 days                                2 days

 Testing and bug fixing               Testing, 3 days                       Testing, 3 days
                                      Fixing, 3 days                        Fixing, 1 day
                                      Testing, 3 days                       Testing, 1 day
                                      Fixing, 2 days                        Fixing, 1 day
                                      Testing, 1 day                        Testing, 1 day
                                      Total: 12 days                        Total: 8 days




                 Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Tough questions and answers   233




 Overall release time         26 days                      24 days

 Bugs found in production     71                           11



        Overall, the time to release with tests was less than without tests. Still,
        the managers on the team with the unit tests didn’t initially believe the
        pilot would be a success because they only looked at the implementa-
        tion (coding) statistic (the first row in table 8.1) as the criteria for suc-
        cess, instead of the bottom line. It took twice the amount of time to
        code the feature (because unit tests cause you to write more code).
        Despite this, the time “wasted” more than made up for itself when the
        QA team found fewer bugs to deal with.
        That’s why it’s important to emphasize that, although unit testing can
        increase the amount of time it takes to implement a feature, the time
        balances out over the product’s release cycle because of increased qual-
        ity and maintainability.

8.4.2   Will my QA job be at risk because of this?
        Unit testing doesn’t eliminate QA-related jobs. QA engineers will
        receive the application with full unit-test suites, which means they can
        make sure all the unit tests pass before they start their own testing pro-
        cess. Having unit tests in place will actually make their job more inter-
        esting. Instead of doing UI debugging (where every second button
        click results in an exception of some sort), they will be able to focus on
        finding more logical (applicative) bugs in real-world scenarios. Unit
        tests provide the first layer of defense against bugs, and QA work pro-
        vides the second layer—the user’s acceptance layer. As with security,
        the application always needs to have more than one layer of protection.
        Allowing the QA process to focus on the larger issues can produce bet-
        ter applications.
        In some places, QA engineers write code, and they can help write unit
        tests for the application. That happens in conjunction with the work of
        the application developers and not instead of it. Both developers and
        QA engineers can write unit tests.




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
234     CHAPTER 8   Integrating unit testing into the organization




8.4.3   How do we know this is actually working?
        To determine whether your unit testing is working, create a metric of
        some sort, as discussed in section 8.2.5. If you can measure it, you’ll
        have a way to know; plus, you’ll feel it.
        Figure 8.2 shows a sample test-code-coverage report (coverage per
        build). Creating a report like this, by running a tool like NCover for
        .NET automatically during the build process, can demonstrate prog-
        ress in one aspect of development.




Figure 8.2 An example test-code-coverage trend report

        Code coverage is a good starting point if you’re wondering whether
        you’re missing unit tests.

8.4.4   Is there proof that unit testing helps?
        There aren’t any specific studies I can point to on whether unit testing
        helps achieve better code quality. Most related studies talk about
        adopting specific agile methods, with unit testing being just one of



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                   Tough questions and answers   235




        them. Some empirical evidence can be gleaned from the web, of com-
        panies and colleagues having great results and never wanting to go
        back to a code base without tests.
        A few studies on TDD can be found at http://biblio.gdinwiddie.com/
        biblio/StudiesOfTestDrivenDevelopment.

8.4.5   Why is the QA department still finding bugs?
        The job of a QA engineer is to find bugs at many different levels,
        attacking the application from many different approaches. Usually a
        QA engineer will perform integration-style testing, which can find
        problems that unit tests can’t. For example, the way different compo-
        nents work together in production may point out bugs even though the
        individual components pass unit tests (which work well in isolation).
        In addition, a QA engineer may test things in terms of use cases or full
        scenarios that unit tests usually won’t cover. That approach can dis-
        cover logical bugs or acceptance-related bugs and is a great help to
        ensuring better project quality.
        A study by Glenford Myre showed that developers writing tests were
        not really looking for bugs, and so found only half to two-thirds of the
        bugs in an application. Broadly, that means there will always be jobs
        for QA engineers, no matter what. Although that study is 30 years old,
        I think the same mentality holds today, which makes the results still
        relevant today, at least for me.

        NOTE      Glenford Myre’s study is discussed in “A controlled experiment in
                  program testing and code walkthroughs/inspections,” in Communica-
                  tions of the ACM 21, no. 9 (September 1978), 760–68.

8.4.6   We have lots of code without tests: where do we start?
        Studies conducted in the 1970s and 1980s showed that, typically, 80
        percent of the bugs are found in 20 percent of the code. The trick is to
        find the code that has the most problems. More often than not, any
        team can tell you which components are the most problematic. Start
        there. You can always add some metrics, as discussed in section 8.2.5,
        relating to the number of bugs per class.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
236     CHAPTER 8      Integrating unit testing into the organization




        NOTE        Studies that show 80 percent of the bugs being in 20 percent of the
                    code include the following: Albert Endres, “An analysis of errors
                    and their causes in system programs,” IEEE Transactions on Software
                    Engineering 2 (June 1975), 140–49; Lee L. Gremillion, “Determi-
                    nants of program repair maintenance requirements,” Communications
                    of the ACM 27, no. 8 (August 1984), 826–32; Barry W. Boehm,
                    “Industrial software metrics top 10 list,” IEEE Software 4, no. 9 (Sep-
                    tember 1987), 84–85; and Shull and others, “What we have learned
                    about fighting defects,” Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium
                    on Software Metrics (2002), 249–58.

        Testing legacy code requires a different approach than when writing
        new code with tests. See chapter 9 for more details.

8.4.7   We work in several languages: is unit testing feasible?
        Sometimes tests written in one language can test code written in other
        languages, especially if it’s a .NET mix of languages. You can write tests
        in C# to test code written in VB.NET, for example. Sometimes each
        team writes tests in the language they develop in: C# developers can
        write tests in C# using NUnit or MbUnit, and C++ developers can write
        tests using one of the C++ oriented frameworks, such as CppUnit. I’ve
        also seen solutions where people who wrote C++ code would write man-
        aged C++ wrappers around it and write tests in C# against those man-
        aged C++ wrappers, which made things easier to write and maintain.

8.4.8   What if we develop a combination of software and hardware?
        If your application is made of a combination of software and hardware,
        you need to write tests for the software. Chances are, you already have
        some sort of hardware simulator, and the tests you write can take
        advantage of this. It may take a little more work, but it’s definitely pos-
        sible, and companies do this all the time.

8.4.9   How can we know we don’t have bugs in our tests?
        You need to make sure your tests fail when they should and pass when
        they should. Test-driven development is a great way to make sure you
        don’t forget to check those things. See chapter 1 for a short walk-
        through of TDD.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                  Tough questions and answers   237




8.4.10 My debugger shows that my code works: why do I need tests?
      You may be sure your code works fine, but what about other people’s
      code? How do you know it works? How do they know your code
      works and that they haven’t broken anything when they make
      changes? Remember that coding is just the first step in the life of the
      code. Most of its life, the code will be in maintenance mode. You need
      to make sure it will tell people when it breaks, using unit tests.
      A study held by Curtis, Krasner, and Iscoe showed that most defects
      don’t come from the code itself, but result from miscommunication
      between people, requirements that keep changing, and a lack of appli-
      cation domain knowledge. Even if you’re the world’s greatest coder,
      chances are that, if someone tells you to code the wrong thing, you’ll do
      it. And when you need to change it, you’ll be glad you have tests for
      everything else to make sure you don’t break it.
      NOTE      The study by Bill Curtis, H. Krasner, and N. Iscoe is “A field study
                of the software design process for large systems,” Communications of
                the ACM 31, no. 11 (November 1988), 1268–1287.

8.4.11 Must we do TDD-style coding?
      TDD is a style choice. I personally see a lot of value in TDD, and many
      people find it productive and beneficial, but others find that writing the
      tests after the code is good enough for them. You can make your own
      choice.
      If this question arises from a fear of too much change happening at
      once, the learning can be broken up into several intermediate steps:
      ❂ Learn unit testing from books such as this, and use tools such as

         Typemock Isolator or JMockit so that you don’t have to worry
         about design aspects while testing.
      ❂ Learn good design techniques, such as SOLID (which is discussed

         at the end of section 3.6 in chapter 3).
      ❂ Learn to do test-driven development. (A good book is Test-Driven

         Development in Microsoft .NET by James Newkirk.)

      This way, the learning is easier and you can get started more quickly
      with less loss of time to the project.



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
238   CHAPTER 8   Integrating unit testing into the organization




 8.5 Summary
      Implementing unit testing in the organization is something that many
      readers of this book will have to face at one time or another. Be pre-
      pared. Make sure you have good answers to the questions you’re likely
      to be asked. Make sure that you don’t alienate the people who can help
      you. Make sure you’re ready for what could be an uphill battle.
      In the next chapter, we’ll take a look at legacy code and examine some
      tools for working with it.




            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
9

Working with legacy code
     This chapter covers
            • Examining common problems with legacy code
            • Deciding where to begin writing tests
            • Surveying helpful tools for working with legacy code




 I    once consulted for a large development shop that produced billing
     software. They had over 10,000 developers and mixed .NET, Java, and
     C++ in products, subproducts, and intertwined projects. The software
     had existed in one form or another for over five years, and most of the
     developers were tasked with maintaining and building on top of existing
     functionality.
     My job was to help several divisions (using all languages) learn test-
     driven development techniques. For about 90 percent of the developers I
     worked with, this never became a reality for several reasons, some of
     which were a result of legacy code:
     ❂ It was difficult to write tests against existing code.
     ❂ It was next to impossible to refactor the existing code (or there was not

       enough time to do it).
     ❂ Some people didn’t want to change their designs.

     ❂ Tooling (or lack of tooling) was getting in the way.

     ❂ It was difficult to determine where to begin.




                                         239



           Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
240   CHAPTER 9   Working with legacy code




      Anyone who’s ever tried to add tests to an existing system knows that
      most such systems are almost impossible to write tests for. They were
      usually written without proper places in the software (seams) to allow
      extensions or replacements to existing components.
      There are several problems that need to be addressed when dealing
      with legacy code:
      ❂ There’s so much work, where should I start to add tests? Where
        should I focus my efforts?
      ❂ How can I safely refactor my code if it has no tests to begin with?

      ❂ What tools can I use with legacy code?


      This chapter will tackle these tough questions associated with
      approaching legacy code bases, by listing techniques, references, and
      tools that can help.


 9.1 Where do you start adding tests?
      Assuming you have existing code inside components, you’ll need to
      create a priority list of components for which testing makes the most
      sense. There are several factors to consider that can affect each compo-
      nent’s priority:
      ❂ Logical complexity—This refers to the amount of logic in the component,

        such as nested ifs, switch cases, or recursion. Tools for checking cyc-
        lomatic complexity can also be used to determine this.
      ❂ Dependency level—This refers to the number of dependencies in the

        component. How many dependencies do you have to break in order
        to bring this class under test? Does it communicate with an outside
        email component, perhaps, or does it call a static log method some-
        where?
      ❂ Priority—This is the component’s general priority in the project.


      You can give each component a rating for these factors, from 1 (low
      priority) to 10 (high priority).
      Table 9.1 shows a short list of classes with ratings for these factors. I
      call this a test-feasibility table.


            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                     Where do you start adding tests?               241




         Table 9.1 A simple test-feasibility table

                     Logical     Dependency
 Component                                      Priority                      Notes
                    complexity      level

Utils              6             1              5              This utility class has few depen-
                                                               dencies but contains a lot of
                                                               logic. It will be easy to test, and it
                                                               provides lots of value.

Person             2             1              1              This is a data-holder class with
                                                               little logic and no dependencies.
                                                               There’s some (small) real value
                                                               in testing this.

TextParser         8             4              6              This class has lots of logic and
                                                               lots of dependencies. To top it
                                                               off, it’s part of a high priority task
                                                               in the project. Testing this will
                                                               provide lots of value but will also
                                                               be hard and time-consuming.

ConfigManager      1             6              1              This class holds configuration
                                                               data and reads files from disk.
                                                               It has little logic but many
                                                               dependencies. Testing it will
                                                               provide little value to the project
                                                               and will also be hard and
                                                               time-consuming.


         From the data in table 9.1, we can create the diagram shown in figure
         9.1, which graphs our components by the amount of value to the proj-
         ect and number of dependencies.
         We can safely ignore items that are below our designated threshold of
         logic (which I usually set at 2 or 3), so Person and ConfigManager can be




                                                    Figure 9.1 Mapping components for
                                                    test feasibility




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
242     CHAPTER 9    Working with legacy code




                                                Figure 9.2 Easy, hard, and irrelevant
                                                component mapping based on logic
                                                and dependencies

        ignored. We’re left with only the top two components from figure 9.1.
        There are two basic ways to look at the graph and decide what you’d
        like to test first (see figure 9.2):
        ❂ Choose the one that’s more complex and easier to test (top left).
        ❂ Choose the one that’s more complex and harder to test (top right).


        The question now is what path you should take. Should you start with
        the easy stuff or the hard stuff?

 9.2 Choosing a selection strategy
        As the previous section explained, you can start with the components
        that are easy to test or the ones that are hard to test (because they have
        many dependencies). Each strategy presents different challenges.

9.2.1   Pros and cons of the easy-first strategy
        Starting out with the components that have fewer dependencies will
        make writing the tests initially much quicker and easier. But there’s a
        catch, as figure 9.3 demonstrates.
        Figure 9.3 shows how long it takes to bring components under test
        during the lifetime of the project. Initially it’s easy to write tests, but as
        time goes by, we’re left with components that are increasingly harder
        and harder to test, with the particularly tough ones waiting for us at the
        end of the project cycle, just when everyone is stressed about pushing a
        product out the door.


              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                  Choosing a selection strategy      243




                                               Figure 9.3 When starting with the
                                               easy components, the time to test
                                               gets longer and longer until the
                                               hardest components are done.


        If your team is relatively new to unit-testing techniques, it’s worth
        starting with the easy components. As time goes by, the team will learn
        the techniques needed to deal with the more complex components and
        dependencies.
        For such a team, it may be wise to initially avoid all components over a
        specific number of dependencies (with 4 being a good place to start).

9.2.2   Pros and cons of the hard-first strategy
        Starting with the more difficult components may seem like a losing
        proposition to begin with, but it has an upside, as long as your team has
        experience with unit-testing techniques.
        Figure 9.4 shows the average time to write a test for a single compo-
        nent over the lifetime of the project, if you start testing the components
        with the most dependencies first.




                                               Figure 9.4 When you use a hard-
                                               first strategy, the time to test is
                                               long for the first few components,
                                               and then it gets shorter as more
                                               dependencies are refactored away.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
244   CHAPTER 9    Working with legacy code




      With this strategy, you could be spending a day or more to get even the
      simplest tests going on the more complex components. But notice the
      quick decline in the time required to write the test relative to the slow
      incline in figure 9.3. Every time you bring a component under test and
      refactor it to make it more testable, you may also be solving testability
      issues for the dependencies it uses, or for other components. Specifi-
      cally because that component has lots of dependencies, refactoring it
      can improve things for other parts of the system. That’s why the quick
      decline appears.
      The hard-first strategy is only possible if your team has experience in
      unit-testing techniques, because it’s harder to implement. If your team
      does have experience, use the priority aspect of components to choose
      whether to start with the hard or easy components first. You might
      want to choose a mix, but it’s important that you know in advance how
      much effort will be involved and what the possible consequences are.

 9.3 Writing integration tests before refactoring
      If you do plan to refactor your code for testability (so you can write
      unit tests), a practical way to make sure you don’t break anything dur-
      ing the refactoring phase is to write integration-style tests against your
      production system.
      I consulted on a large legacy project, working with a developer who
      needed to work on an XML configuration manager. The project had no
      tests and was hardly testable. It was also a C++ project, so we couldn’t
      use a tool like Typemock Isolator to isolate components without refac-
      toring the code.
      The developer needed to add another value attribute into the XML file
      and be able to read and change it through the existing configuration
      component. We ended up writing a couple of integration tests that used
      the real system to save and load configuration data, and that asserted
      on the values the configuration component was retrieving and writing
      to the file. Those tests set the “original” working behavior of the config-
      uration manager as our base of work.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                               Writing integration tests before refactoring   245




Next, we wrote an integration test that showed that, once the compo-
nent was reading the file, it contained no attribute in memory with the
name we were trying to add. We proved that the feature was missing,
and we now had a test that would pass once we added the new attri-
bute to the XML file and correctly wrote to it from the component.
Once we wrote the code that saved and loaded the extra attribute, we
ran the three integration tests (two tests for the original base imple-
mentation, and a new one that tried to read the new attribute). All
three passed, so we knew that we hadn’t broken existing functionality
while adding the new functionality.
As you can see, the process is relatively simple:
❂ Add one or more integration tests (no mocks or stubs) to the system
  to prove the original system works as needed.
❂ Refactor or add a failing test for the feature you’re trying to add to

  the system.
❂ Refactor and change the system in small chunks, and run the inte-

  gration tests as often as you can, to see if you break something.
Sometimes, integration tests may seem easier to write than unit tests,
because you don’t need to mess with dependency injection. But making
those tests run on your local system may prove annoying or time-con-
suming because you have to make sure every little thing the system
needs is in place.
The trick is to work on the parts of the system that you need to fix or
add features to. Don’t focus on the other parts. That way, the system
grows in the right places, leaving other bridges to be crossed when you
get to them.
As you continue adding more and more tests, you can refactor the sys-
tem and add more unit tests to it, growing it into a more maintainable
and testable system. This takes time (sometimes months and months),
but it’s worth it.
Did I mention that you need to have good tools? Let’s look at some of
my favorites.



      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
246     CHAPTER 9      Working with legacy code




 9.4 Important tools for legacy code unit testing
        Here are a few tips on tools that can give you a head start if you’re
        doing any testing on existing code in .NET:
        ❂ Isolate dependencies easily with Typemock Isolator.
        ❂ Find testability problems with Depender.

        ❂ Use JMockit for Java legacy code.

        ❂ Use Vise while refactoring your Java code.

        ❂ Use FitNesse for acceptance tests before you refactor.

        ❂ Read Michael Feathers’ book on legacy code.

        ❂ Use NDepend to investigate your production code.

        ❂ Use ReSharper to navigate and refactor your production code more

          easily.
        ❂ Detect duplicate code (and bugs) with Simian.

        ❂ Detect threading issues with Typemock Racer.


        Let’s look at each of these in a little more detail.

9.4.1   Isolate dependencies easily with Typemock Isolator
        Typemock Isolator was introduced in chapter 5, and it’s the only com-
        mercial-grade isolation framework (which means it allows stubs and
        mocks) of the frameworks currently on the market. It’s also different
        from the other frameworks in that it’s the only one that allows you to
        create stubs and mocks of dependencies in production code without
        needing to refactor it at all, saving valuable time in bringing a compo-
        nent under test.
        NOTE        Full disclosure: While writing this book, I also worked as a devel-
                    oper at Typemock on a different product. I also helped to design the
                    API in Isolator 5.0.
        In its latest version (5.2 at the time of writing this book), Isolator uses
        the term “fake” and removes completely the words “mock” and “stub”
        from the API. Using the new framework, you can “fake” interfaces,
        sealed and static types, nonvirtual methods, and static methods. This



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                    Important tools for legacy code unit testing   247




means you don’t need to worry about changing the design (which you
may not have time for, or perhaps can’t for testability reasons). You
can start testing almost immediately. There’s also a free version of
Typemock Isolator for open source projects, so you can feel free to
download this product and try it on your own.
Listing 9.1 shows a couple of examples of using the new Isolator API
to fake instances of classes.
Listing 9.1 Faking static methods and creating fake classes with Isolator

[Test]
 public void FakeAStaticMethod()
 {
    Isolate
    .WhenCalled(()=>MyClass.SomeStaticMethod())
    .WillThrowException(new Exception());

 }

[Test]
 public void FakeAPrivateMethodOnAClassWithAPrivateConstructor()
 {
    ClassWithPrivateConstructor c =
       Isolate.Fake.Instance<ClassWithPrivateConstructor>();
    Isolate.NonPublic
           .WhenCalled(c,"SomePrivateMethod").WillReturn(3);
 }


As you can see, the API is simple and clear, and uses generics and dele-
gates to return fake values. There’s also an API specifically dedicated
for VB.NET that has a more VB-centric syntax. In both APIs, you don’t
need to change anything in the design of your classes under test to make
these tests work, because Isolator uses the specialized extended reflection
(or profiler APIs) of the .NET Common Language Runtime to perform its
actions. This gives it much more power than other frameworks.
Isolator is a great framework if you want to start testing, you have
existing code bases, and you want a bridge that can help make the hard
stuff more agile. There are more examples and downloads at
www.Typemock.com.



       Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
248     CHAPTER 9   Working with legacy code




                                                         Figure 9.5 Depender is
                                                         simple and easy to use.


9.4.2   Find testability problems with Depender
        Depender is a free tool I’ve created that can analyze .NET assemblies
        for their types and methods, and can help determine possible testability
        problems in methods (static methods, for example). It displays a simple
        report for an assembly or a method, as shown in figure 9.5.

        You can download Depender from my blog: http://weblogs.asp.net/
        rosherove/archive/2008/07/05/introducing-depender-testability-prob-
        lem-finder.aspx.

9.4.3   Use JMockit for Java legacy code
        JMockit is an open source project that uses the Java instrumentation
        APIs to do some of the same things that Typemock Isolator does in




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                  Important tools for legacy code unit testing       249




.NET. You don’t need to change the design of your existing project to
isolate your components from their dependencies.
JMockit uses a swap approach. First, you create a manually coded
class that will replace the class that acts as a dependency to your com-
ponent under test (say you code a FakeDatabase class to replace a
Database class). Then you use JMockit to swap calls from the original
class to your own fake class. You can also redefine a class’s methods by
defining them again as anonymous methods inside the test.
Listing 9.2 shows a sample of a test that uses JMockit.
Listing 9.2 Using JMockit to swap class implementations

public class ServiceATest extends TestCase            {
      private boolean serviceMethodCalled;

       public static class MockDatabase              {
          static int findMethodCallCount;
          static int saveMethodCallCount;

           public static void save(Object o)              {
              assertNotNull(o);
              saveMethodCallCount++;
           }

           public static List find(String ql, Object arg1)               {
              assertNotNull(ql);
              assertNotNull(arg1);
              findMethodCallCount++;
              return Collections.EMPTY_LIST;
           }
       }

       protected void setUp() throws Exception {
          super.setUp();
          MockDatabase.findMethodCallCount = 0;
          MockDatabase.saveMethodCallCount = 0;
          Mockit.redefineMethods(Database.class,                          The magic
                              MockDatabase.class);                        happens here
       }

       public void testDoBusinessOperationXyz() throws Exception                 {
          final BigDecimal total = new BigDecimal("125.40");




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
250     CHAPTER 9         Working with legacy code




                    Mockit.redefineMethods(ServiceB.class,
                                              new Object()                         The magic
                                                                                   happens here
        {
                          public BigDecimal computeTotal(List items)
                          {
                             assertNotNull(items);
                             serviceMethodCalled = true;
                             return total;
                          }
                    });

                    EntityX data = new EntityX(5, "abc", "5453-1");
                    new ServiceA().doBusinessOperationXyz(data);

                    assertEquals(total, data.getTotal());
                    assertTrue(serviceMethodCalled);
                    assertEquals(1, MockDatabase.findMethodCallCount);
                    assertEquals(1, MockDatabase.saveMethodCallCount);
               }
        }


        JMockit is a good place to start when testing Java legacy code.

9.4.4   Use Vise while refactoring your Java code
        Michael Feathers wrote an interesting tool for Java that allows you to
        verify that you aren’t messing up the values that may change in your
        method while refactoring it. For example, if your method changes an
        array of values, you want to make sure that as you refactor you don’t
        screw up a value in the array.
        Listing 9.3 shows an example of using the Vise.grip() method for such
        a purpose.
        Listing 9.3 Using Vise in Java code to verify values aren’t changed while refactoring

        import vise.tool.*;

        public class RPRequest {
            ...
            public int process(int level, RPPacket packet) {




               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Important tools for legacy code unit testing   251




                  if  (...) {
                      if (...) {
                          ...
                      } else {
                          ...
                          bar_args[1] += list.size();              Grips
                          Vise.grip(bar_args[1]);                  an object
                          packet.add(new Subpacket(list, arrivalTime));
                          if (packet.calcSize() > 2)
                               bar_args[1] += 2;
                          Vise.grip(bar_args[1]);                  Grips
                      }                                            an object
                  } else {
                      int reqLine = -1;
                      bar_args[0] = packet.calcSize(reqLine);
                      Vise.grip(bar_args[0]);
                      ...
            }
            }
        }


        NOTE       The code in listing 9.3 is copied with permission from http://
                   www.artima.com/weblogs/viewpost.jsp?thread=171323.
        Vise forces you to add lines to your production code, and it’s there to
        support refactoring of the code. There’s no such tool for .NET, but it
        should be pretty easy to write one. Every time you call the Vise.grip()
        method, it checks whether the value of the passed-in variable is still
        what it’s supposed to be. It’s like adding an internal assert to your code,
        with a simple syntax. Vise can also report on all “gripped” items and
        their current values.
        You can read about and download Vise free from Michael Feathers’
        blog: http://www.artima.com/weblogs/viewpost.jsp?thread=171323.

9.4.5   Use FitNesse for acceptance tests before you refactor
        It’s a good idea to add integration tests to your code before you start
        refactoring it. FitNesse is one tool that helps create a suite of integra-
        tion- and acceptance-style tests. FitNesse allows you to write integra-




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
252   CHAPTER 9    Working with legacy code




      tion-style tests (in Java or .NET) against your application, and then
      change or add to them easily without needing to write code.
      Using the FitNesse framework involves three steps:
      1   Create code adapter classes (called fixtures) that can wrap your pro-
          duction code and represent actions that a user might take against it.
          For example, if it were a banking application, you might have a
          bankingAdapter class that has withdraw and deposit methods.
      2   Create HTML tables using a special syntax that the FitNesse engine
          recognizes and parses. These tables will hold the values that will be
          run during the tests. You write these tables in pages in a specialized
          wiki website that runs the FitNesse engine underneath, so that your
          test suite is represented to the outside world by a specialized web-
          site. Each page with a table (which you can see in any web browser)
          is editable like a regular wiki page, and each has a special “execute
          tests” button. These tables are then parsed by the testing runtime
          and translated into test runs.
      3   Click the Execute Tests button on one of the wiki pages. That but-
          ton invokes the FitNesse engine with the parameters in the table.
          Eventually, the engine calls your specialized wrapper classes that
          invoke the target application and asserts on return values from your
          wrapper classes.




             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                        Important tools for legacy code unit testing   253




        Figure 9.6 shows an example FitNesse table in a browser.




                                                                 Figure 9.6 Using
                                                                 FitNesse for integration

        You can learn more about FitNesse at http://fitnesse.org/. For .NET
        integration with FitNesse, go to http://fitnesse.org/FitNesse.DotNet.

9.4.6   Read Michael Feathers’ book on legacy code
        Working Effectively with Legacy Code, by Michael Feathers, is the only book I
        know that deals with the issues you’ll encounter with legacy code
        (other than this chapter). It shows many refactoring techniques and
        gotchas in depth that this book doesn’t attempt to cover. It’s worth its
        weight in gold. Go get it.

9.4.7   Use NDepend to investigate your production code
        NDepend is a relatively new commercial analyzer tool for .NET that
        can create visual representations of many aspects of your compiled
        assemblies, such as dependency trees, code complexity, changes
        between the different versions of the same assembly, and more. The pos-
        sibilities of this tool are huge, and I recommend you learn how to use it.
        NDepend’s most powerful feature is a special query language (called
        CQL) you can use against the structure of your code to find out vari-




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
254     CHAPTER 9   Working with legacy code




        ous component metrics. For example, you could easily create a query
        that reports on all components that have a private constructor.
        You can get NDepend from http://www.ndepend.com.

9.4.8   Use ReSharper to navigate and refactor production code
        ReSharper is one of the best productivity-related plugins for VS.NET.
        In addition to powerful automated refactoring abilities (much more
        powerful than the ones built into Visual Studio 2008), it’s known for its
        navigation features. When jumping into an existing project, ReSharper
        can easily navigate the code base with shortcuts that allow you to jump
        from any point in the solution to any other point that might be related
        to it.
        Here are some examples of possible navigations:
        ❂ When in a class or method declaration, you can jump to any inheri-
          tors of that class or method, or jump up to the base implementation
          of the current member or class, if one exists.
        ❂ You can find all uses of a given variable (highlighted in the current

          editor).
        ❂ You can find all uses of a common interface or a class that imple-

          ments it.
        These and many other shortcuts make it much less painful to navigate
        and understand the structure of existing code.
        ReSharper works on both VB.NET and C# code. You can download a
        trial version at www.jetbrains.com.

9.4.9   Detect duplicate code (and bugs) with Simian
        Let’s say you found a bug in your code, and you want to make sure that
        bug was not duplicated somewhere else. With Simian, it’s easy to track
        down code duplication and figure out how much work you have ahead
        of you, as well as refactoring to remove duplication. Simian is a com-
        mercial product that works on .NET, Java, C++, and other languages.
        You can get Simian here:
        http://www.redhillconsulting.com.au/products/simian/.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                               Summary      255




9.4.10 Detect threading issues with Typemock Racer
      If your production code uses multiple threads, Typemock Racer may
      help you discover common but hard-to-detect threading problems in
      your existing code. It’s a relatively new product that aims to find dead-
      locks and race conditions in your existing production code without
      needing to change it.
      You can find out more about it at www.Typemock.com.

 9.5 Summary
      In this chapter, we talked about how to approach legacy code for the
      first time. It’s important to map out the various components according
      to their number of dependencies, their amount of logic, and the project
      priority. Once you have that information, you can choose the compo-
      nents to work on based on how easy or how hard it will be to get them
      under test.
      If your team has little or no experience in unit testing, it’s a good idea
      to start with the easy components and let the team’s confidence grow as
      they add more and more tests to the system. If your team is experi-
      enced, getting the hard ones under test first can help you get through
      the rest of the system more quickly.
      If your team doesn’t want to start refactoring code for testability, but
      only to start with unit testing out of the box, a tool like Typemock Iso-
      lator will prove helpful because it allows you to isolate dependencies
      without changing the existing code’s design. Consider this tool when
      dealing with legacy .NET code. If you work with Java, consider
      JMockit for the same reasons.
      I also covered a number of tools that can prove helpful in your journey
      to better code quality for existing code. Each of these tools can be used
      in different stages of the project, but it’s up to your team to choose
      when to use which tool (if any at all).
      Finally, as a friend once said, a good bottle of vodka never hurts when
      dealing with legacy code.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Appendix A


Design and testability


C   hanging the design of your code so that it’s more easily testable is a
    controversial issue for some developers. This appendix will cover the
    basic concepts and techniques for designing for testability. We’ll also look
    at the pros and cons of doing so and when it’s appropriate.
    First, though, let’s consider why you would need to design for testability
    in the first place.

A.1 Why should I care about testability in my design?
    The question is a legitimate one. In designing our software, we’re taught to
    think about what the software should accomplish, and what the results will
    be for the end user of the system. But tests against our software are yet
    another type of user. That user has strict demands for our software, but
    they all stem from one mechanical request: testability. That request can
    influence the design of our software in various ways, mostly for the better.
    In a testable design, each logical piece of code (loops, ifs, switches, and so
    on) should be easy and quick to write a unit test against, one that demon-
    strates these properties:
    ❂ Runs fast
    ❂ Is isolated, meaning it can run independently or as part of a group of

      tests, and can run before or after any other test
    ❂ Requires no external configuration

    ❂ Provides a consistent pass/fail result




                                         256



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                               Design goals for testability   257




    These are the FICC properties: fast, isolated, configuration-free, and
    consistent. If it’s hard to write such a test, or it takes a long time to
    write it, the system isn’t testable.
    If you think of tests as a user of your system, designing for testability
    becomes a way of thinking. If you were doing test-driven development,
    you’d have no choice but to write a testable system, because in TDD
    the tests come first and largely determine the API design of the system,
    forcing it to be something that the tests can work with.
    Now that you know what a testable design is, let’s look at what it
    entails, go over the pros and cons of such design decisions, and discuss
    alternatives to the testable design approach.

A.2 Design goals for testability
    There are several design points that make code much more testable.
    Robert C. Martin has a nice list of design goals for object-oriented sys-
    tems that largely form the basis for the designs shown in this chapter.
    See his “Principles of OOD” article at http://butunclebob.com/Arti-
    cleS.UncleBob.PrinciplesOfOod.
    Most of the advice I include here is about allowing your code to have
    seams—places where you can inject other code or replace behavior
    without changing the original class. (Seams are often talked about in
    connection with the Open Closed Principle, which is mentioned in the
    Martin’s “Principles of OOD” article.) For example, in a method that
    calls a web service, the web service API can hide behind a web service
    interface, allowing us to replace the real web service with a stub that
    will return whatever values we want, or with a mock object. Chapters
    3–5 discuss fakes, mocks, and stubs in detail.
    Table A.1 lists some basic design guidelines and their benefits. The fol-
    lowing sections will discuss them in more detail.




          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
258      APPENDIX A         Design and testability




         Table A.1 Test design guidelines and benefits

                Design guideline                                             Benefit(s)

 Make methods virtual by default.                     This allows you to override the methods in a derived
                                                      class for testing. Overriding allows for changing
                                                      behavior or breaking a call to an external
                                                      dependency.

 Use interface-based designs.                         This allows you to use polymorphism to replace
                                                      dependencies in the system with your own stubs or
                                                      mocks.

 Make classes nonsealed by default.                   You can’t override anything virtual if the class is
                                                      sealed (final in Java).

 Avoid instantiating concrete classes inside          This allows you to serve up your own fake instances
 methods with logic. Get instances of classes         of classes to methods that require them, instead of
 from helper methods, factories, Inversion of         being tied down to working with an internal production
 Control containers such as Unity, or other           instance of a class.
 places, but don’t directly create them.

 Avoid direct calls to static methods. Prefer         This allows you to break calls to static methods by
 calls to instance methods that later call statics.   overriding instance methods. (You won’t be able to
                                                      override static methods.)

 Avoid constructors and static constructors that      Overriding constructors is difficult to implement.
 do logic.                                            Keeping constructors simple will simplify the job of
                                                      inheriting from a class in your tests.

 Separate singleton logic from singleton holder.      If you have a singleton, have a way to replace its
                                                      instance so you can inject a stub singleton or reset it.



A.2.1    Make methods virtual by default
         Java makes methods virtual by default, but .NET developers aren’t so
         lucky. In .NET, to be able to replace a method’s behavior, you need to
         explicitly set it as virtual so you can override it in a default class. If you
         do this, you can use the Extract and Override method that I discussed
         in chapter 3.
         An alternative to this method is to have the class invoke a custom dele-
         gate. You can replace this delegate from the outside by setting a prop-
         erty or sending in a parameter to a constructor or method. This isn’t a
         typical approach, but some system designers find this approach suit-
         able. Listing A.1 shows an example of a class with a delegate that can
         be replaced by a test.



                  Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                            Design goals for testability   259




        Listing A.1 A class that invokes a delegate that can be replaced by a test

        public class MyOverridableClass
        {
            public Func<int,int> calculateMethod=delegate(int i)
                                                      {
                                                          return i*2;
                                                      };
            public void DoSomeAction(int input)
            {
                int result = calculateMethod(input);
                if (result==-1)
                {
                     throw new Exception("input was invalid");
                }
                //do some other work
            }
        }

           [Test]
           [ExpectedException(typeof(Exception))]
            public void DoSomething_GivenInvalidInput_ThrowsException()
            {
                MyOverridableClass c = new MyOverridableClass();
                int SOME_NUMBER=1;

                   //stub the calculation method to return "invalid"
                   c.calculateMethod = delegate(int i) { return -1; };

                   c.DoSomeAction(SOME_NUMBER);
             }


        Using virtual methods is handy, but interface-based designs are also a
        good choice, as the next section explains.

A.2.2   Use interface-based designs
        Identifying “roles” in the application and abstracting them under
        interfaces is an important part of the design process. An abstract class
        shouldn’t call concrete classes, and concrete classes shouldn’t call con-
        crete classes either, unless they’re data objects (objects holding data,
        with no behavior). This allows you to have multiple seams in the



                 Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
260     APPENDIX A   Design and testability




        application where you could intervene and provide your own imple-
        mentation.
        For examples of interface-based replacements, see chapters 3–5.

A.2.3   Make classes nonsealed by default
        Some people have a hard time making classes nonsealed by default
        because they like to have full control over who inherits from what in
        the application. The problem is that, if you can’t inherit from a class,
        you can’t override any virtual methods in it.
        Sometimes you can’t follow this rule because of security concerns, but
        following it should be the default, not the exception.

A.2.4   Avoid instantiating concrete classes inside methods with logic
        It can be tricky to avoid instantiating concrete classes inside methods
        that contain logic because we’re so used to doing it. The reason for
        doing so is that later our tests might need to control what instance is
        used in the class under test. If there’s no seam that returns that
        instance, the task would be much more difficult unless you employ
        external tools, such as Typemock Isolator. If your method relies on a
        logger, for example, don’t instantiate the logger inside the method. Get
        it from a simple factory method, and make that factory method virtual
        so that you can override it later and control what logger your method
        works against. Or use constructor injection instead of a virtual method.
        These and more injection methods are discussed in chapter 3.

A.2.5   Avoid direct calls to static methods
        Try to abstract any direct dependencies that would be hard to replace at
        runtime. In most cases, replacing a static method’s behavior is difficult
        or cumbersome in a static language like VB.NET or C#. Abstracting a
        static method away using the Extract and Override refactoring (shown
        in section 3.4.6 of chapter 3) is one way to deal with these situations.
        A more extreme approach is to avoid using any static methods whatso-
        ever. That way, every piece of logic is part of an instance of a class that
        makes that piece of logic more easily replaceable. Lack of replaceability



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                    Design goals for testability   261




        is one of the reasons some people who do unit testing or TDD dislike
        singletons; they act as a public shared resource that is static, and it’s
        hard to override them.
        Avoiding static methods altogether may be too difficult, but trying to
        minimize the number of singletons or static methods in your applica-
        tion will make things easier for you while testing.

A.2.6   Avoid constructors and static constructors that do logic
        Things like configuration-based classes are often made static classes or
        singletons because so many parts of the application use them. That
        makes them hard to replace during a test. One way to solve this prob-
        lem is to use some form of Inversion of Control containers (such as
        Microsoft Unity, Autofac, Ninject, StructureMap, Spring.NET, or
        Castle Windsor—all open source frameworks for .NET).
        These containers can do many things, but they all provide a common
        smart factory, of sorts, that allows you to get instances of objects with-
        out knowing whether the instance is a singleton, or what the underly-
        ing implementation of that instance is. You ask for an interface (usually
        in the constructor), and an object that matches that type will be pro-
        vided for you automatically, as your class is being created.
        When you use an IoC container (also known as a dependency injection
        container), you abstract away the lifetime management of an object
        type and make it easier to create an object model that’s largely based on
        interfaces, because all the dependencies in a class are automatically
        filled up for you.
        Discussing containers is outside the scope of this book, but you can
        find a comprehensive list and some starting points in the “List of .NET
        Dependency Injection Containers (IOC)” article on Scott Hanselman’s
        blog: http://www.hanselman.com/blog/ListOfNETDependencyInjec-
        tionContainersIOC.aspx.

A.2.7   Separate singletons and singleton holders
        If you’re planning to use a singleton in your design, separate the logic
        of the singleton class and the logic that makes it a singleton (the part



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
262   APPENDIX A     Design and testability




      that initializes a static variable, for example) into two separate classes.
      That way, you can keep the single responsibility principle (SRP) and
      also have a way to override singleton logic.
      For example, listing A.2 shows a singleton class, and listing A.3 shows
      it refactored into a more testable design.
      Listing A.2 An untestable singleton design

      public class MySingleton
          {
              private static MySingleton _instance;
              public static MySingleton Instance
              {
                  get
                  {
                      if (_instance == null)
                      {
                          _instance = new MySingleton();
                      }

                         return _instance;
                    }
                }
          }



      Listing A.3 The singleton class refactored into a testable design

        public class RealSingletonLogic                               Newly testable logic
          {
              public void Foo()
              {
                  //lots of logic here
              }
          }
                                                                            Singleton
      public class MySingletonHolder                                        container
          {
              private static RealSingletonLogic _instance;
              public static RealSingletonLogic Instance
              {
                  get
                  {




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                          Pros and cons of designing for testability   263




                          if (_instance == null)
                          {
                              _instance = new RealSingletonLogic();
                          }

                          return _instance;
                      }
                  }
            }


        Now that we’ve gone over some possible techniques for achieving test-
        able designs, let’s get back to the larger picture. Should you do it at all,
        and are there any consequences of doing it?

 A.3 Pros and cons of designing for testability
        Designing for testability is a loaded subject for many people. Some
        believe that testability should be one of the default traits of designs, and
        others believe that designs shouldn’t “suffer” just because someone will
        need to test them.
        The thing to realize is that testability isn’t an end goal in itself, but is
        merely a byproduct of a specific school of design that uses the more
        testable object-oriented principles laid out by Robert C. Martin (men-
        tioned at the beginning of section A.2). In a design that favors class
        extensibility and abstractions, it’s easy to find seams for test-related
        actions. All the techniques shown in this appendix so far are very much
        aligned with Robert Martin’s principles.
        The question remains, is this the best way to do things? What are the
        cons of such a method? What happens when you have legacy code?
        And so on.

A.3.1   Amount of work
        In most cases, it takes more work to design for testability than not
        because doing so usually means writing more code.
        You could argue that the extra design work required for testability
        points out design issues you hadn’t considered and that you might have



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
264     APPENDIX A   Design and testability




        been expected to incorporate in your design anyway (separation of
        concerns, single responsibility principle, and so on).
        On the other hand, assuming you’re happy with your design as is, it
        can be problematic to make changes for testability, which isn’t part of
        production. Again, you could argue that test code is as important as
        production code, because it exposes the API usage characteristics of
        your domain model and forces you to look at how someone will use
        your code.
        From this point on, discussions of this matter are rarely productive.
        Let’s just say that more code, and work, is required when testability is
        involved, but that designing for testability makes you think about the
        user of your API more, which is a good thing.

A.3.2   Complexity
        Designing for testability can sometimes feel a little (or a lot) like it’s
        overcomplicating things. You can find yourself adding interfaces
        where it doesn’t feel natural to use interfaces, or exposing class behav-
        ior semantics that you hadn’t considered before. In particular, when
        many things have interfaces and are abstracted away, navigating the
        code base to find the real implementation of a method can become
        more difficult and annoying.
        You could argue that using a tool such as ReSharper makes this argu-
        ment obsolete, because navigation with ReSharper is much easier. I
        agree that it eases most of the navigational pains. The right tool for the
        right job can help a lot.

A.3.3   Exposing sensitive IP
        Many projects have sensitive intellectual property that shouldn’t be
        exposed, but which designing for testability would force to be exposed:
        security or licensing information, or perhaps algorithms under patent.
        There are workarounds for this—keeping things internal and using the
        [InternalsVisibleTo] attribute—but they essentially defy the whole
        notion of testability in the design. You’re changing the design but still
        keeping the logic hidden. Big deal.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                          Alternatives to designing for testability   265




        This is where designing for testability starts to melt down a bit. Some-
        times you can’t work around security or patent issues. You have to
        change what you do or compromise on the way you do it.

A.3.4   Sometimes you can’t
        Sometimes there are political or other reasons for the design to be done
        a specific way, and you can’t change or refactor it. Sometimes you
        don’t have the time to refactor your design, or the design is too fragile
        to refactor. This is another case where designing for testability breaks
        down—when you can’t or won’t do it.
        Now that we’ve gone through some pros and cons, it’s time to consider
        some alternatives to designing for testability.

 A.4 Alternatives to designing for testability
        It’s interesting to look outside the box at other languages to see other
        ways of working.
        In dynamic languages such as Ruby or Smalltalk, the code is inherently
        testable because you can replace anything and everything dynamically
        at runtime. In such a language, you can design the way you want without
        having to worry about testability. You don’t need an interface in order to
        replace something, and you don’t need to make something public to
        override it. You can even change the behavior of core types dynamically,
        and no one will yell at you or tell you that you can’t compile.
        In a world where everything is testable, do you still design for testabil-
        ity? The answer is, of course, “no.” In that sort of world, you’re free to
        choose your own design.
        Consider a .NET-related analogy that shows how using tools can
        change the way you think about problems, and sometimes make big
        problems a non-issue. In a world where memory is managed for you,
        do you still design for memory management? Mostly, “no” would be
        the answer. People working in languages where memory isn’t managed
        for them (C++, for example) need to worry about and design for mem-
        ory optimization and collection, or the application will suffer.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
266   APPENDIX A   Design and testability




      In the same way, by following testable object-oriented design princi-
      ples, you might get testable designs as a byproduct, but testability
      should not be a goal in your design. It’s just there to solve a specific
      problem. If a tool comes along that solves the testability problem for
      you, there will be no need to design specifically for testability. There
      are other merits to such designs, but using them should be a choice and
      not a fact of life.
      The main problems with nontestable designs is their inability to
      replace dependencies at runtime. That’s why we need to create inter-
      faces, make methods virtual, and do many other related things. There
      are tools that can help replace dependencies in .NET code without
      needing to refactor it for testability. One such tool is Typemock Isola-
      tor (www.Typemock.com), a commercial tool with an open source
      alternative.
      Does the fact that a tool like Isolator exists mean we don’t need to
      design for testability? In a way, yes. It rids us of the need to think of
      testability as a design goal. There are great things about the OO pat-
      terns Bob Martin presents, and they should be used not because of
      testability, but because they seem right in a design sense. They can
      make code easier to maintain, easier to read, and easier to develop,
      even if testability is no longer an issue.

 A.5 Summary
      In this appendix, we looked at the idea of designing for testability:
      what it involves in terms of design techniques, its pros and cons, and
      alternatives to doing it. There are no easy answers, but the questions
      are interesting. The future of unit testing will depend on how people
      approach such issues, and on what tools are available as alternatives.
      Testable designs usually only matter in static languages, such as C# or
      VB.NET, where testability depends on proactive design choices that
      allow things to be replaced. Designing for testability matters less in
      more dynamic languages, where things are much more testable by default.
      In such languages, most things are easily replaceable, regardless of the
      project design.



            Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         Summary      267




Testable designs have virtual methods, nonsealed classes, interfaces,
and a clear separation of concerns. They have fewer static classes and
methods, and many more instances of logic classes. In fact, testable
designs are what SOLID design principles have stood for. Perhaps it’s
time that the end goal should not be testability, but good design instead.




      Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Appendix B


Extra tools and frameworks


T   his book would not be complete without an overview of some tools and
    basic techniques you can use while writing code. From database testing to
    UI testing and web testing, this appendix lists tools you should consider.
    Some of them are used for integration testing, and some allow unit
    testing. I’ll also mention some that I think are good for beginners.
    The tools and techniques listed below are arranged in the following cate-
    gories:
    ❂ Isolation frameworks

    ❂ Test frameworks

    ❂ Dependency injection and IoC containers

    ❂ Database testing

    ❂ Web testing

    ❂ UI testing

    ❂ Thread-related testing

    ❂ Acceptance testing


    TIP   An updated version of the following list can be found on the book’s wiki
          site: ArtOfUnitTesting.com.
    Let’s begin.

B.1 Isolation frameworks
    Mock or isolation frameworks are the bread and butter of advanced unit-
    testing scenarios. There are many to choose from, and that’s a great thing:


                                        268



          Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                         Isolation frameworks   269




        ❂ Moq
        ❂ Rhino Mocks

        ❂ Typemock Isolator

        ❂ NMock

        ❂ NUnit.Mocks

        Here is a short description of each framework.

B.1.1   Moq
        Moq is an open source newcomer to the world of mocking and has
        adopted an API that tries to be both simple to learn and easy to use.
        The API also follows the arrange-act-assert style (as opposed to the
        record-and-replay model) and relies heavily on .NET 3.5 features, such
        as lambdas and extension methods. If you’re planning on working with
        .NET 3.5 exclusively, this is a relatively pain-free learning curve, but
        you need to feel comfortable with using lambdas.
        In terms of features, it has fewer than most other mock frameworks,
        which also means it’s simpler to learn.
        You can get Moq at http://code.google.com/p/moq/.

B.1.2   Rhino Mocks
        Rhino Mocks is a widely used open source framework for mocks and
        stubs. It’s also the framework used throughout this book for examples,
        and it’s discussed more in chapter 5.
        Rhino Mocks is loaded with features and has recently moved to using
        the new arrange-act-assert syntax.
        You can get Rhino Mocks at
        http://ayende.com/projects/rhino-mocks.aspx.

B.1.3   Typemock Isolator
        Typemock Isolator is a powerful commercial isolation framework that
        tries to remove the terms “mocks” and “stubs” from its vocabulary in
        favor of a more simple and terse API.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
270     APPENDIX B    Extra tools and frameworks




        Isolator differs from the other frameworks by allowing you to isolate
        components from their dependencies regardless of how the system is
        designed (although it supports all the features the other frameworks
        have). This makes it ideal for people who are getting into unit testing
        and want an incremental approach to learning. Because it doesn’t force
        you to design for testability, you can learn to write tests correctly and
        then move on to learning better design, without having to mix the two
        together.
        NOTE      Full disclosure: While writing this book, I’ve also been working at
                  Typemock.
        You can get Typemock Isolator at www.typemock.com.

B.1.4   NMock
        NMock is an open source mocking framework that started out as a
        direct port of jMock. It used to be the de facto mocking framework
        until Rhino Mocks took its place in the open source world. The main
        reason it was dethroned is that it did not offer strong typing of method
        names. (You had to use strings to define expectations on methods.)
        Lately, it has been getting back into development, and the new 2.0
        release marks a nice change in the API. It remains to be seen how well
        it will do against the current competition.
        You can get NMock at www.NMock.org.

B.1.5   NUnit.Mocks
        NUnit.Mocks is an ultra-small open source mocking framework that
        comes built into NUnit as a separate DLL. It initially started life as an
        aid for testing NUnit internally, and NUnit’s authors still discourage
        people from using it in their own projects, because it may “disappear”
        in the future.
        NUnit.Mocks is one of the simplest frameworks to learn with, but I
        don’t recommend using it for anything other than a learning tool.
        You can get NUnit.Mocks as part of the installation of NUnit at
        http://nunit.com.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                Test frameworks     271




 B.2 Test frameworks
        The test frameworks are the bases from which we start writing our
        tests. Like mock frameworks, there are many to choose from, and this
        competition has brought lots of innovation with it. Here are some of
        the available frameworks:
        ❂ Microsoft’s Unit Testing Framework
        ❂ NUnit

        ❂ MbUnit

        ❂ Gallio

        ❂ xUnit

        ❂ Pex

        Let’s look at each in turn.

B.2.1   Microsoft’s Unit Testing Framework
        Microsoft’s Unit Testing Framework (also known as MSTest) comes
        bundled with any version of Visual Studio .NET 2008 professional or
        above. It includes basic features that are similar to NUnit, but it runs a lit-
        tle slower. The upcoming versions of Visual Studio (2010) will add a lot
        of power to this framework, but you can use it today as easily as NUnit.
        One big problem with this framework is that it’s not as easily extensi-
        ble as the other testing frameworks. To see how cumbersome it is to
        add a simple attribute, see the discussion of YUnit on MSDN at http://
        code.msdn.microsoft.com/yunit.
        One big plus for this framework is that it’s integrated into the Visual
        Studio Team System tool suite and provides good reporting, coverage,
        and build automation out of the box. If your company uses Team Sys-
        tem, I highly suggest using MSTest as your test framework because of
        the good integration possibilities.
        You can get MSTest with Visual Studio.

B.2.2   NUnit
        NUnit is currently the de facto test framework for unit test developers
        in .NET. It’s open source and is in almost ubiquitous use among those



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
272     APPENDIX B    Extra tools and frameworks




        who do unit testing. I cover NUnit deeply in chapter 2. NUnit is easily
        extensible and has a large user base and forums. I’d recommend it to
        anyone starting out with unit testing in .NET. I still use it today.
        You can get NUnit at http://nunit.com.

B.2.3   MbUnit
        MbUnit is fully open source, and the “mb” stands for “model-based”
        testing. It started out as a competitor to NUnit but soon zoomed past
        NUnit in terms of features and abilities.
        MbUnit is easily extensible and supports lots of interesting test attri-
        butes, such as Repeat and Timeout. MbUnit has its own UI and con-
        sole runners that also support running tests written in NUnit. If you’re
        looking for something more in your current test framework, MbUnit is
        a good step up from NUnit. I almost never have to use such features
        myself, but if you’re mixing integration testing and unit testing with the
        same framework, MbUnit is a good fit.
        You can get MbUnit at www.mbunit.com.

B.2.4   Gallio
        Gallio is an open source platform for running tests written in most (if
        not all) unit test frameworks in .NET, from NUnit to MSTest. Gallio is
        also extensible, and you can create your own custom test runner using
        it. It has plugins for Visual Studio .NET, which can highlight coding
        errors relating to tests and other things. It’s still not in very popular
        use, but it’s built by the same people who maintain MbUnit, and it’s a
        fully working, robust product that seems to have been in an endless
        beta cycle for the past year or so.
        You can get Gallio at www.gallio.org.

B.2.5   xUnit
        xUnit is an open source test framework, developed in cooperation with
        one of the original authors of NUnit, Jim Newkirk. It’s a minimalist
        and elegant test framework that tries to get back to basics by having
        fewer features, not more, than the other frameworks, and by support-
        ing different names on its attributes.



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                              IoC containers   273




        What is so radically different about it? It has no setup or teardown
        methods, for one. You have to use the constructor and a dispose method
        on the test class. Another big difference is in how easy it is to extend.
        Because xUnit reads so differently from the other frameworks, it takes
        a while to get used to it if you’re coming from a framework like NUnit
        or MbUnit. If you’ve never used any test framework before, xUnit is
        easy to grasp and use, and it’s robust enough to be used in a real project.
        For more information and download see www.codeplex.com/xunit.

B.2.6   Pex
        Pex (short for program exploration) is an intelligent assistant to the
        programmer. From a parameterized unit test, it automatically produces
        a traditional unit test suite with high code coverage. In addition, it sug-
        gests to the programmer how to fix the bugs.
        With Pex, you can create special tests that have parameters in them,
        and put special attributes on those tests. The Pex engine will generate
        new tests that you can later run as part of your test suite. It’s great for
        finding corner cases and edge conditions that aren’t handled properly
        in your code. You should use Pex in addition to a regular test frame-
        work, such as NUnit or MbUnit.
        You can get Pex at http://research.microsoft.com/projects/pex/.

 B.3 IoC containers
        IoC (Inversion Of Control) containers can be used to improve the
        architectural qualities of an object-oriented system by reducing the
        mechanical costs of good design techniques (such as using constructor
        parameters, managing object lifetimes, and so on).
        Containers can enable looser coupling between classes and their
        dependencies, improve the testability of a class structure, and provide
        generic flexibility mechanisms. Used judiciously, containers can
        greatly enhance the opportunities for code reuse by minimizing direct
        coupling between classes and configuration mechanisms (such as by
        using interfaces).



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
274     APPENDIX B   Extra tools and frameworks




        We’ll look at the following tools:
        ❂ StructureMap
        ❂ Microsoft Unity

        ❂ Castle Windsor

        ❂ Autofac (Auto Factory)

        ❂ Common Service Locator Library

        ❂ Spring.NET

        ❂ Microsoft Managed Extensibility Framework

        ❂ Ninject

        Let’s look briefly at each of these frameworks.

B.3.1   StructureMap
        StructureMap is an open source container framework that has one
        clear differentiator from the others. Its API is very fluent and tries to
        mimic natural language and generic constructs as much as possible.
        StuctureMap has a relatively small user base, and the current documen-
        tation on it is lacking, but it contains some powerful features, such as a
        built-in automocking container (a container that can create stubs auto-
        matically when requested to by the test), powerful lifetime management,
        XML-free configuration, integration with ASP.NET, and more.
        You can get StructureMap at http://structuremap.sourceforge.net.

B.3.2   Microsoft Unity
        Unity is a latecomer to the DI container field, but it provides a simple
        and minimal approach that can be easily learned and used by begin-
        ners. Advanced users may find it lacking, but it certainly answers my
        80-20 rule: it provides 80 percent of the features you look for most of
        the time.
        Unity is open source by Microsoft, and it has good documentation. I’d
        recommend it as a starting point for working with containers.
        You can get Unity at www.codeplex.com/unity.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                               IoC containers   275




B.3.3   Castle Windsor
        Castle is a large open source project that covers a lot of areas. Windsor
        is one of those areas, and it provides a mature and powerful implemen-
        tation of a DI container.
        Castle Windsor contains most of the features you’ll ever want in a con-
        tainer and more, but it has a relatively high learning curve due to all the
        features.
        You can learn about Castle Windsor at www.castleproject.org/con-
        tainer/ and download the Castle project at www.castleproject.org.

B.3.4   Autofac
        Autofac is a fresh approach to IoC in .NET that fits well with the C# 3.0
        syntax. It takes a rather minimalistic approach in terms of APIs. The
        API is radically different from the other frameworks, and requires a bit
        of getting used to. It also requires .NET 3.5 to work, and you’ll need a
        good knowledge of lambda syntax. Autofac is difficult to explain, so
        you’ll have to go to the site to see how different it is. I recommend it for
        people who already have experience with other DI frameworks.
        You can get it at http://code.google.com/p/autofac/.

B.3.5   Common Service Locator Library
        The Common Service Locator (CSL) was born out of a need to create
        a common infrastructure in applications for getting instances of things.
        Using the advice of the leading open source container frameworks,
        Microsoft created a shared library that can help abstract away the
        actual container your application might use. The CSL sits in front of
        the container of your choice, be it Unity, StructureMap, or Castle.
        You don’t need to use the CSL, but the concept of abstracting away the
        choice of container in your application is a useful one. Most application
        authors were doing this anyway, so using CSL is one step in making it
        more of a recommended design pattern.
        You can get the Common Service Locator library at www.code-
        plex.com/CommonServiceLocator.




              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
276     APPENDIX B   Extra tools and frameworks




B.3.6   Spring.NET
        Spring.NET is an open source container framework. It’s one of the
        oldest and is a port of the Java Spring Container libraries. It has a lot
        of abilities, but many consider it to be a sort of dinosaur among the
        other frameworks, with an API that isn’t as easy to use, and configura-
        tion that isn’t as friendly as it could be.
        You can get Spring.NET at www.springframework.net.

B.3.7   Microsoft Managed Extensibility Framework
        The Managed Extensibility Framework (MEF) isn’t actually a con-
        tainer, but it does fall in the same general category of providing ser-
        vices that instantiate classes in your code. It’s designed to be much
        more than a container; it’s a full plugin model for small and large appli-
        cations. MEF includes a lightweight IoC container framework so you
        can easily inject dependencies into various places in your code by using
        special attributes.
        MEF does require a bit of a learning curve, and I wouldn’t recommend
        using it strictly as an IoC container. If you do use it for extensibility
        features in your application, it can also be used as a DI container.
        You can get MEF at www.codeplex.com/MEF.

B.3.8   Ninject
        Ninject is a latecomer to the DI field, but it has a simple syntax and
        good usability. There isn’t much else to say about it except that I highly
        recommend taking a look at it.
        You can find out more about Ninject at http://ninject.org/.

 B.4 Database testing
        How to do database testing is a burning question for those who are
        starting out. Many questions arise, such as, “Should I stub out the
        database in my tests?” This section provides some guidelines.
        First, let’s talk about doing integration tests against the database.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                            Database testing    277




B.4.1   Use integration tests for your data layer
        How should you test your data layer? Should you abstract away the
        database interfaces? Should you use the real database?
        I usually write integration-style tests for the data layer (the part of the
        app structure that talks directly to the database) in my applications
        because data logic is almost always divided between the application
        logic and the database itself (triggers, security rules, referential integ-
        rity, and so on). Unless you can test the database logic in complete iso-
        lation (and I’ve found no really good framework for this purpose), the
        only way to make sure it works in tests is to couple testing the data-
        layer logic to the real database.
        Testing the data layer and the database together leaves few surprises
        for later in the project. But testing against the database has its prob-
        lems, the main one being that you’re testing against state shared by
        many tests. If you insert a line into the database in one test, the next
        test can see that line as well.
        What we need is a way to roll back the changes we make to the data-
        base, and thankfully there’s good support for this in the current test
        tools and the .NET framework.

B.4.2   Use rollback attributes
        The three major frameworks—MbUnit, NUnit, and xUnit—support a
        special [Rollback] attribute that you can put on top of your test
        method. When used, the attribute creates a special database transac-
        tion that the test code runs in. When the test is finished, the database
        transaction is rolled back automatically, and the changes to the data-
        base vanish.
        To learn more about how this works, see an MSDN article I wrote a
        while back, called “Simplify Data Layer Unit Testing using Enterprise
        Services” at http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/magazine/cc163772.aspx.
        If you aren’t interested in using the [Rollback] attributes the frame-
        works provide, you can use the simple class introduced in .NET 2.0
        called TransactionScope.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
278     APPENDIX B   Extra tools and frameworks




B.4.3   Use TransactionScope to roll back
        For examples on how to use the TransactionScope class in your setup
        and teardown code, see a blog article called “Even Simpler Database
        Unit Testing with TransactionScope” at http://www.bbits.co.uk/blog/
        archive/2006/07/31/12741.aspx.
        Some feel that another good option is to run the tests against an in-
        memory database. My feelings on that are mixed. On the one hand, it’s
        closer to reality, in that you also test the database logic. On the other
        hand, if your application uses a different database engine, with differ-
        ent features, there’s a big chance that some things will pass or fail dur-
        ing tests with the in-memory database, and will work differently in
        production. I choose to work with whatever is as close to the real thing
        as possible. Usually that means using the same database engine.

 B.5 Web testing
        “How do I test my web pages?” is another question that comes up a lot.
        Here are some tools that can help you in this quest:
        ❂ Ivonna
        ❂ Team System Web Test

        ❂ NUnitAsp

        ❂ Watir

        ❂ WatiN

        ❂ Selenium

        The following is a short description of each tool.

B.5.1   Ivonna
        Ivonna is a unit-testing framework that abstracts away the need to run
        ASP.NET-related tests using a real HTTP session and pages. It does
        some powerful things behind the scenes, such as compiling pages that
        you want to test and letting you test controls inside them without need-
        ing a browser session, and it fakes the full HTTP runtime model.
        You write the code in your unit tests just like you’re testing other in-
        memory objects. There’s no need for a web server and such nonsense.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                              Web testing    279




        Ivonna is being developed in partnership with Typemock and runs as
        an add-on to the Typemock Isolator framework. You can get Ivonna at
        http://sm-art.biz/Ivonna.aspx.

B.5.2   Team System Web Test
        Visual Studio Team Test and Team Suite editions include the powerful
        ability to record and replay web requests for pages and verify various
        things during these runs. This is strictly integration testing, but it’s
        really powerful. The latest versions also support recording Ajax actions
        on the page, and make things much easier to test in terms of usability.
        You can find more info on Team System at http://msdn.microsoft.com/
        en-us/teamsystem/default.aspx.

B.5.3   NUnitAsp
        NUnitAsp is an open source framework that’s no longer being sup-
        ported but is still used in many places. It allows you to write tests
        against live HTTP page objects.
        Most people end up using NUnitAsp for acceptance testing. In those
        cases, it would be better to use frameworks such as Watir and WatiN,
        described next.
        You can get NUnitAsp at http://nunitasp.sourceforge.net/.

B.5.4   Watir
        Watir (pronounced “water”) stands for “Web application testing in
        Ruby”. It’s open source, and it allows scripting of browser actions
        using the Ruby programming language. Many Rubyists swear by it,
        but it does require that you learn a whole new language.
        You can get Watir at http://wtr.rubyforge.org/.

B.5.5   WatiN
        WatiN (pronounced “what-in”) is a product inspired by Watir. You
        don’t need to know Ruby to use WatiN, but it offers much the same
        scripting abilities as Watir.
        You can get WatiN at http://watin.sourceforge.net/.



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
280     APPENDIX B   Extra tools and frameworks




B.5.6   Selenium
        Selenium is a suite of tools designed to automate web app testing across
        many platforms. It has existed longer than all the other frameworks in
        this list, and it also has an API wrapper for .NET.
        Selenium is an integration testing framework, and it’s in wide use. It’s a
        good place to start. But beware: it has many features and the learning
        curve is high.
        You can get it at http://selenium.openqa.org/.


 B.6 UI testing
        UI testing is always a difficult task. I’m not a great believer in writing
        unit tests or integration tests for UIs because the return on such tests is
        low compared to the amount of time you invest in writing them. UIs
        change too much to be testable in a consistent manner, as far as I’m
        concerned. That’s why I usually try to separate all the logic from the
        UI into a lower layer that I can test separately with standard unit-test-
        ing techniques.
        Nevertheless, there are several tools that try to make the UI-testing job
        easier:
        ❂ NUnitForms
        ❂ Project White

        ❂ Team System UI Tests


        Here is a short rundown of each tool.

B.6.1   NUnitForms
        NUnitForms is an open source framework that allows you to instanti-
        ate Windows Forms classes and check values of controls inside them. It
        has specific APIs for getting controls in a form and asserting values
        against them, but it will only work for simple controls.
        More complex controls aren’t supported and the framework doesn’t
        seem to be in active development anymore, so I recommend not using



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                       Thread-related testing   281




        it. Instead, I recommend Project White (discussed next) for WinForm
        testing.
        You can get it at http://nunitforms.sourceforge.net/.

B.6.2   Project White
        Project White is, in a way, a successor to NUnitForms, in that it sup-
        ports a richer set of application types (WPF, WinForm, Win32, and
        Java JWT), and sports a newer API with better usability. Unlike
        NUnitForms, White is more of an integration-test framework, because
        it allows spawning separate processes that it tests against.
        White uses the UIAutomation API (part of Windows) to do its bid-
        ding, which gives it much more power. You can think of it as Selenium
        or WatiN for WinForms.
        You can get White at http://www.codeplex.com/white.

B.6.3   Team System UI Tests
        The upcoming version of Visual Studio Team System will support a
        new kind of test—a UI test. You’ll be able to record actions on UI win-
        dows and play them back and verify assertions during test runs. As
        with all Team System tools, its main advantage will be its integration
        with other Team System tools, reports, source control, and servers.
        You can learn more about Team System at http://msdn.microsoft.com/
        en-us/teamsystem/default.aspx.

 B.7 Thread-related testing
        Threads have always been the bane of unit testing. They’re simply untest-
        able. That’s why new frameworks are emerging that let you test thread-
        related logic (deadlocks, race conditions, and so on), such as these:
        ❂ Typemock Racer
        ❂ Microsoft CHESS

        ❂ Osherove.ThreadTester

        I’ll give a brief rundown of each tool.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
282     APPENDIX B    Extra tools and frameworks




B.7.1   Typemock Racer
        Typemock Racer is a managed framework for multithreaded code test-
        ing that helps visualize, detect, and resolve deadlocks and race condi-
        tions in managed code. You use it by putting an attribute on top of an
        existing test method, and the engine does all the work. It also allows
        full thread visualization during debugging of a threaded test.
        NOTE      Full disclosure: during the writing of this book, I’ve been part of the
                  developer team at Typemock.
        Racer is a commercial product that works with all flavors of Visual
        Studio (including Express) and all test frameworks. You can get it at
        www.Typemock.com.

B.7.2   Microsoft CHESS
        CHESS is an upcoming tool that will be offered by Microsoft with
        Visual Studio 2010. (It’s currently offered only as part of MS
        Research.) Much like Typemock Racer, CHESS attempts to find
        thread-related problems (deadlocks, hangs, livelocks, and more) in
        your code by running all relevant permutations of threads on existing
        code. These tests are written as simple unit tests.
        CHESS currently supports native code, but a managed .NET version
        should be coming out soon as part of Visual Studio Team System (a
        commercial product).
        You can get CHESS at
        http://research.microsoft.com/projects/CHESS/.

B.7.3   Osherove.ThreadTester
        This is a little open source framework I developed a while back. It
        allows you to run multiple threads during one test to see if anything
        weird happens to your code (deadlocks, for example). It isn’t feature-
        complete, but it’s a good attempt at a multithreaded test (rather than a
        test for multithreaded code).
        You can get it from my blog, at http://weblogs.asp.net/rosherove/
        archive/2007/06/22/multi-threaded-unit-tests-with-osherove-thread-
        tester.aspx.



               Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                          Acceptance testing   283




 B.8 Acceptance testing
        Acceptance tests enhance collaboration between customers and devel-
        opers in software development. They enable customers, testers, and
        programmers to learn what the software should do, and they automati-
        cally compare that to what it actually does. They compare customers'
        expectations to actual results. It’s a great way to collaborate on compli-
        cated problems (and get them right) early in development.
        Unfortunately, there are few frameworks for automated acceptance
        testing, and just one that works these days! I’m hoping this will change
        soon. Here are the tools we’ll look at:
        ❂ FitNesse
        ❂ StoryTeller

        Let’s take a closer look.

B.8.1   FitNesse
        FitNesse is a lightweight, open source framework that makes it easy
        for software teams to define acceptance tests—web pages containing
        simple tables of inputs and expected outputs—and to run those tests
        and see the results.
        FitNesse is quite buggy, but it has been in use in many places with
        varying degrees of success.
        You can learn more about FitNesse at www.fitnesse.org.

B.8.2   StoryTeller
        StoryTeller is a response to FitNesse, which has existed for a long time
        but presented many usability and stability problems for users. It’s an
        open source framework, still in development, that attempts to create a
        more compelling UI and usability story than FitNesse. There aren’t
        many details on it yet, but hopefully it will be out soon. It will support
        running tests written for FitNesse.
        The project page is at http://storyteller.tigris.org/, but most of the real
        details are found on the author’s blog: http://codebetter.com/blogs/jer-
        emy.miller/archive/tags/StoryTeller/default.aspx.



              Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
Index
Symbols                                                anti-patterns 192
.dll 32                                                  constrained test order 192
.NET 21, 25, 56, 69, 100, 151                            external-shared-state corruption 198
  extension methods 129, 269                             hidden test call 194
  Moq framework 100, 126                                 shared-state corruption 196
  NMock 100                                            API 168
  Rhino Mocks 100                                        See also interface
  Typemock 100                                         API changes 174
.NET mock object frameworks 129                        Arrange action 30
                                                       arrange-act-assert model 103, 126
A                                                      arrange-act-assert style 269
AAA See arrange-act-assert model                       arrange-act-assert syntax 269
                                                       art of unit testing 52
AAA-style stubs 128
                                                       ArtOfUnitTesting 268
abstract class 259
                                                       ASP.NET 274, 278
abstract test class 159                                Assert 31, 35–36, 38, 42–43
abstract test driver class pattern 159                 Assert action 30
abstract test infrastructure class pattern 152         Assert class 31
abstractions 263                                       assert failures 180
acceptance testing 268, 283                            assert messages 209, 212
acceptance-style test 251                                best practices 212
accidental bugging 9                                     repetition 213
Act action 30                                          assert utility class 168
action attributes 34                                   assert utility method 168
action-driven testing 83                               Assert.AreEqual 31
actions See test actions                               Assert.AreSame 31
Adapt Parameter 96                                     Assert.IsTrue 31
Addison-Wesley 227, 231                                Assertion See test assertion
agent of change 220                                    assertion logic 188
agile 142, 234                                         assumptions 205, 209
Ajax 279                                               attributes
analyzer object 188                                      Category 39
annotated method 79                                      ExpectedException 38
anonymous delegate 120, 124–125                          Ignore 38
anonymous method 124, 249                                SetUp 34–35

                                                 284



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                         INDEX          285




attributes (continued)                      code churn 228
  TearDown 34–35                            “Code Churn Perspective” article 228
  Test 30                                   Code Complete 228
  TestFixture 30                            code consistency 225
  TestFixtureSetUp 36                       code coverage 180, 273
  TestFixtureTearDown 36                    code design 208
  See also NUnit & unit-testing framework   code duplication 254
Auto Factory See Autofac                      refactoring 254
Autofac 62, 261, 274–275                    code integration 142
automated build 142–143, 146–147, 169,      code integrity 224
     225                                    code library 24
  types 144                                 code quality 18, 231, 234
automated test 6, 11, 28, 30, 141           code reuse 151, 156
automocking container 274                   code smell 208
                                            code under test See system under test
B                                           code with logic 23, 28
base class 75, 159, 163–165                 collaborator 50, 208
Beck, Kent 4                                collections 209
Beizer, Boris 227                           Common Language Runtime 247
best practices 172, 230                     Common Service Locator 274–275
blockers 220                                Communications of the ACM 235–237
bottom-up change 223                        Complete Guide to Software Testing, The 7
brittle test 94, 97, 107, 206               components 5, 240–241
  less brittle test 207
                                              complex 243
broken test 38, 175, 182
                                              easy 243
build break 142
                                              mapping 241
build process 142–143, 228, 234
                                              priority list 240
business logic 8
                                              rating 240
C                                           composite object hierarchy 62
C# 124, 236                                 concrete class 259
C++ 25, 100, 236, 239, 244, 265             Conditional attribute 79
  mockpp 100                                conditional compilation 69, 79
call chains 96                                #if and #endif 80
callback 120, 132                             when to use 69
calling test 196                            configuration class 168
Castle 275                                  configuration data 241
  See also Microsoft Castle                 Configuration property 95
Castle Windsor 62, 261, 274–275             ConfigurationManager 152
Category 39                                 ConfigurationManagerTests 152
champions 220, 226                          conflicting test 176–177
CHESS 282                                   console application 5, 13
class 5, 8, 148                             constructor injection 58–59, 64–65, 260
  methods 5, 148                              parameters 63
class extensibility 263                       when to use 63
class library 28                            constructors 258
class under test See system under test        static constructors 258
classic object-oriented design 81           containers 62
classic testing 6                             Autofac 62
code adapter classes 252                      Castle Windsor 62



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
286     INDEX




containers (continued)                       dependency driven 242
  container object 62                        dependency injection 64, 245, 261, 268
  factory methods 62                         Dependency Inversion Principle 78
  Microsoft Unity 62                         dependency level 240
  Ninject 62                                 Depender 246, 248
  Spring.NET 62                              derived class 71–72, 156, 158–159, 163–164,
  StructureMap 62                                 166
continuous integration 144, 225              Design Patterns 68
continuous integration build 144             development stages 232
correctness 4                                DI container 275
CppUnit 25, 236                              DI frameworks 275
CQL 253                                      domain logic 61
CRUD (create, retrieve, update and           dos and don'ts of introducing unit
    delete) 159                                   testing 219
CruiseControl.NET 143                        driving force 229
CSL See Common Service Locator               DRY (“don’t repeat yourself”)
Curtis, Bill 237                                  principle 151, 184
custom header 159                            duplicate code 246
cyclomatic complexity 240                    duplicate test 173, 177, 185
                                             duplication 182, 184, 186
D                                              factory methods 187
data access 8                                  removing 186, 196
data helper 8                                  setup method 188
data layer 277                                 See also duplicate test
data objects 259                             dynamic fake 102
database testing 268, 276                    dynamic fake object
data-holder class 241                          definition 102
DBConfiguration 95                           dynamic languages 266
debug switch 68                              dynamic mock object 102, 104, 137
debugging 19, 32, 146, 225                   dynamic mocks 99
  bug-fixing time 228                        dynamic stubs 99
  bugs 10, 18–19
                                               combining with mocks 112
  bugs per class 235
  reopening bugs 228                         dynamically generated object 104
decision-making code See logical code
decoupled design 132                         E
defects 228                                  easy-first strategy 242
delegates 247, 258                             pros and cons 242
dependencies 11, 40, 52–53, 62–63, 65, 80,   EasyMock 100
    132, 240–241, 243                        Eclipse 165
  breaking 55                                Eclipse for Java 22
  direct dependency 51, 54, 260              empirical evidence 235
  external dependency 87                     encapsulation 77
  fake dependency 58, 69                       See also object-oriented
  injecting fake dependencies 97             end assert 208
  injection with properties 64               end functionality 174, 182
  non-optional 61, 63                        end result 83, 90, 158, 208
  production dependencies 75                 Endres, Albert 236
  relevant 62                                entry points for test-driven
  replacing 73                                   development 222



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                       INDEX       287




event notification 26                   Extract and Override 71, 73, 75, 81
event recognition 26                     when to use 74, 77
events 121
  event source 124                      F
  event-related actions 121             factories 68
  event-related assertions 132          factory class 168
  EventsVerifier 125                       fake factory 69
  registering for an event 121             faking 70
  testing event triggering 124             implementation 68
  triggering an event 123               factory method 72, 151, 163–165, 167–168
exceptions 14, 24, 38, 179, 199            virtualizing 76
  ArgumentException 36                  factory pattern 66
  deliberate exceptions 33              failing test 18, 32–33, 36, 174, 178, 191, 200,
  expected exceptions 36                     245
  stack trace 24                        fake class 249
  unhandled exception 33                fake component 95
Execute Tests button 252                fake dependency 70
execution path 36                          See also dependencies
expectations 104, 109, 135              fake exception 129
  assertion 105                         fake methods 134
  best practices 136                    fake objects 44, 68, 84, 97, 108, 110, 189,
  expectations on mocks 105                  191
  expectations on stubs 105                return values 108
  mockEngine.Verify(mockObject) 105     fake result 75
  mockEngine.VerifyAll() 105            fake values 247
  MockRepository.GenerateStub 105       fakes 50, 90, 135, 191
  MockRepository.StrictMock 105            when a mock object 90
  MockRepository.Stub 105                  when a stub 90
  MockRespository.DynamicMock. 105      faking 69–70
  Moq framework 126                        fake result 75
  nonstrict mocks 106                      fake returning a fake 71
  order of method calls 109                layers 69
  overspecifying 136                    fast tests 39
  recording stage 109                   fast-running test 144
  simulated object 104                  Feathers, Michael 10, 55, 73, 96, 183, 246,
  strict mocks 106                           250–251, 253
  stub object 111                       feedback 10
  Verify(mock) 105                      FICC properties 257
  verifying 111                         filesystem 50, 51, 53
expected object 119                        configuration file 52
ExpectedException 38, 44, 49               FileExtensionManager 53–54, 56
  expected exception message 38         final functionality 7
  See also exceptions                   final result See final functionality
extended reflection PIs 247             FinalBuilder 143
extensions 240                          FitNesse 246, 251, 283
external dependency 50, 89, 258            download 253
  definition 50                            usage 252
external resource 44, 168, 196–197      FitNesse engine 252
external-shared-state corruption 192       wrapper classes 252



             Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
288     INDEX




FitNesse table 252                         HUnit 25
fixture 36, 252                            Hunt, Andy 151
flow diagrams 224
folder structure 145                       I
FUD (fear, uncertainty, and doubt) 220     IDE See integrated development
full objects 119, 203                          environment
                                           IEEE Software 236
G                                          IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 236
Gallio 271–272                             IExtensionManager 58
generic implementation 15                  Ignore 38
generics 152, 166, 247                     ignored test 38–39
GlobalUtil 95                              independent test 34
goals 227                                  indirect testing 40
good test 171                              indirection 52–53, 71, 181
good unit test 3                             layers 70
  See also unit test                       infrastructure API 167
Gremillion, Lee L. 236                     inheritance 151, 157
gripped items 251                            See also test class inheritance
groups                                     inheritance patterns 165
  test-code coverage report 226            initial state 196
guerrilla-style implementation 223         injecting 58
GUID (globally unique identifier) 116      injection 55, 89
                                             constructor injection 58
H                                            factory class 66
Hanselman, Scott 62, 261                     getting stub before method call 66
hardcoded strings 209                        local factory 71
hard-first strategy 242, 244                 properties 64
  pros and cons 243                          See also stub
hardware 236                               insiders 220
hardware simulator 236                     integrated development environment 22
Haskell programming language 25            integrating test-driven development 219
helper classes 8, 117, 170                 integration process 144
  Contains 117                             integration test 7–8, 45, 50–51, 169, 244
  EndsWith 117                               failure points 8
  Like 117                                   hidden 146
  StartsWith 117                             problems 51
  Text 117                                   slow-running tests 145
helper frameworks 63                       integration testing 3, 7, 151, 168, 268, 272
  See also containers                        definition 8
helper methods 15–16, 162, 186, 188,         drawbacks 9
     190–191, 198, 215, 258                  See also integration test
Hetzel, Bill 7                             integration testing framework 280
hidden test call 192                       integration zone 147
  duplication 195                            See also safe green zone
  flow testing 195                         integration-style test 244, 251, 277
  laziness 195                               process 245
  problems 195                             intellectual property 264
  solutions 195                            IntelliJ IDEA 165
HTML tables 252                            intellisense 210



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                               INDEX       289




interaction testing 82–83, 137                   K
   action-driven testing 83                      Krasner, H. 237
   comparison with state-based testing 83
   definition 83                                 L
interactive user dialogs 14                      lambda syntax 275
interface 52                                     lambdas 128, 134, 269
   custom implementation 58                      leftover state 34
   extraction 55                                 legacy code 9, 132, 236, 239, 246, 254
   IExtensionManager 58                             definition 10
   interactive 53                                   problems 240
   original implementation 58                    legacy code tools
   receiving as a property 55, 58                   when to use which 246
   receiving at constructor level 55, 58         legacy project 244
   underlying implementation 52–53               legacy system 51
   See also stub
                                                 license.txt 26
Interface Segregation Principle 78               Liskov Substitution Principle 78
interface-based design 260
                                                 lists 209
internal method 183
                                                 Load event 122
InternalsVisibleTo 78, 80
                                                 local factory 71
invalid test 173, 176
inversion of control 62                          log files 25
inversion of control containers See containers   LogAn project 25, 29
Inversion of Control principle 63                LogAnalyzer 35, 41, 50, 67, 87, 105, 152
IoC 275                                             interaction with web service 89
   See also inversion of control
                                                 LogAnalyzerTests 152
IoC containers 63, 261, 268, 273                 logger dependency 152
   See also containers                           LoggingFacility 152
IP See intellectual property                     logical code 12
Iscoe, N. 237                                    logic-driven 242
isolated test 256                                long-running test 144
isolation frameworks 268
   See also mock object frameworks               M
Isolator See Typemock                            magic values 137
Ivonna 278                                       maintainability 4, 44, 63, 81, 89, 94, 96, 141,
IWebService 104                                      150, 171, 176–177, 181, 185, 195, 216,
                                                     231, 233
J                                                maintainable test 11, 16, 18, 25, 33, 61, 97,
Java 25, 100, 131, 239, 248, 258                     175, 188, 203, 205, 215
  EasyMock 100                                   maintenance mode 237
  jMock 100                                      management 224
  legacy code 250                                manual mocks 94, 96, 98, 103, 113
  Vise 250                                        problems 96, 100
Java JWT 281                                     manual stubs 94, 96
Java Spring Container 276                         problems 96
jMock framework 100, 131, 270                    Martin, Robert C. (“Bob”) 78, 257, 263, 266
JMockit 237, 246, 248–250                        MbUnit 192, 236, 271–272, 277
  test sample 249                                 parameterized test 201
Johnson, Mark 227                                 RowSet attribute 201
Jones, Capers 231                                McConnell, Steve 228
JUnit 25, 192                                    McGraw-Hill 231



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
290     INDEX




MEF See Microsoft Managed Extensibility       mock service 124
    Framework                                 mockpp 100
Meszaros, Gerard 50, 88, 149, 205             MockRepository
method 28                                      StrictMock 103
method behavior 182                           mocks 50, 269
method constants 181                           See also mock object
method contract 182                           model-based testing 272
method logic 36                               module 24
method parameters 181                         Moq framework 100, 126, 130, 134, 269
method strings 133                            MSBuild 143
Microsoft 274–275, 282                        MSDN 271, 277
Microsoft Castle 275                          MSTest 271
Microsoft CHESS 281                           multiple aspects 202
 See also CHESS                               multiple asserts 94, 179–180, 198, 202–203
Microsoft Managed Extensibility               multiple method calls 134
    Framework 274, 276                        multiple tests 15, 177, 200, 202
Microsoft Press 228                           multiple threads 254
Microsoft Unity 62, 261, 274                  multithreaded test 179, 282
missing test 181                              Myre, Glenford 235
mock classes 132
mock email service 91                         N
mock frameworks 74                            namespace 32, 39, 145, 147
mock object 44, 82, 85, 87, 89–90, 99, 105,   naming convention 210
    108, 135, 189, 257                        NAnt 143
 asserts 85                                   NCover 180, 234
 combining with stubs 89, 97                  NDepend 246, 253
 definition 84                                  download 253
 difference with stub 84, 97                    query language 253
 dynamic mocks 99                             new test 180
 expectations 105                             Newkirk, James (“Jim”) 237, 272
 how many per test 94                         nightly build 147, 225
 LastCall 108                                 Ninject 62, 261, 274, 276
 mock object frameworks 85                    NMock 100, 131, 269–270
 nonstrict mocks 106                          NMock2 131
 optimal mocks per test 136                     difference with Rhino Mocks 131
 return values 108                            nonsealed classes 258, 260, 267
 reusing 89                                   nonstrict mocks 106–107, 136
 setters 94                                   nontestable design 262, 266
 strict mocks 106                             NUnit 21, 24–27, 29–30, 32, 35, 49, 102,
 using mocks too much 97                          156, 192, 199, 271–272, 277
 what to test 136                               actions 34
mock object frameworks 98–99, 121, 126          assembly 29, 32
 advantages 100, 134                            Assert class 30
 arrange-act-assert 126                         attribute scheme 29
 definition 100                                 attributes 26, 29, 34–36, 44
 parameter constraints 115                      automated test 30
 Rhino Mocks 99                                 Categories tab 40
 smart stubs 110                                color scheme 33
 when not to use 135                            getting started 26



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                                 INDEX          291




NUnit (continued)                               overspecified test 206–207
 GUI 26, 32–33, 39                                features 205
 initial state 34
 installing 26                                  P
 open source license 26                         parameter constraints 115–116, 132
 parameterized test 201                           combining constraints 118
 Row attribute 201                                helper classes 116
 RowSet attribute 201                             parameter object properties 118
 Run button 32, 40                                string constraint 116
 Selected Categories 40                         parameter injection 58
 SetUp attribute 34                             parameter object refactoring 62
 special attributes 34                          parameter verification 120, 134
 TearDown attribute 34                          parameterized test 199, 202
 test actions 30                                parser class 162
 Test attribute 30                              partial code test 23
 test class 30                                  patent issues 265
 test method 30                                 Peer Reviews in Software: A Practical Guide 227
 Test Not Run tab 39                            Pex 271, 273
 TestFixture attribute 30                       phishing 95
 typename 32                                    pilot project 223, 232
 unit test runner 26                              statistics 232
 version 26                                     pilot test 222
NUnit.Extensions.dll 201                        political support 229
NUnit.Framework namespace 31                    polymorphism 258
NUnit.Mocks 130, 133, 269–270                   Poole, Charlie 131
 limitations 131                                posters 225
NUnitAsp 279                                    Pragmatic Programmer, The 151
NUnitForms 280–281                              presenter class 122
                                                “Principles of OOD” article 257
                                                priority 240, 244
O                                               private method 182
object calls 82                                 problem output 14
object configuration methods 167                Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on
object model 167                                    Software Metrics 236
object-oriented 52, 66, 77–78, 151, 182, 257,   production bug 173
    263, 266                                      fixing 173
  encapsulation 77                              production class 13
  object-oriented design 78                     production code 18, 29, 33, 66, 70, 72, 75,
Open Closed Principle 78, 257                        79, 123, 136, 141, 148, 173, 180, 264
ordered mocks 109                                 See also production class
organizational change 223                       production server 143
  bottom-up 223                                 productivity 231
  top-down 223–224                              profiler APIs 247
organizational culture 219                      program exploration See Pex
organizational structure 228                    Programming Productivity 231
Osherove.ThreadTester 281–282                   progress metrics 228
outside consultant 224                          project 148
  advantages 224                                  See also testing project
overriding 203                                  project failure
overspecification 205                             causes 229



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
292     INDEX




project feasibility 222–223                     refactoring phase 244
Project White 281                               regression 9
properties 12, 64                               reinvention 230
property injection 65                           renaming 173, 177
  when to use 65                                Repeat 272
protected method 182                            repeatable test 6, 22
public functionality 206                        repetition 137
public properties 94                            replaceability 260
                                                ReSharper 165, 246, 253, 264
Q                                                 download 254
QA engineer 220, 233, 235                         navigations 253
QA process 233                                  ReSharper for .NET 134
QA team 233                                     result-driven testing 83
                                                  end result 83
R                                               return values 212
readability 4, 61, 79, 89, 94, 96, 98, 128,     Rhino Mocks 99–100, 107, 110, 114, 116,
     130, 135, 149–150, 170, 177–178, 209,           126, 132, 137, 269
     216                                          arrange-act-assert model 103
  assert messages 209, 212                        comparison with other .NET mock object
  definition 171                                       frameworks 129
  importance 171                                  introduction 102
  mock object initialization 215                  Mock Repository 103
  separation of asserts and actions 214           ordered mocks 109
  setup and teardown method 214                   parameter constraints types 117
  test naming 210                                 record-and-replay model 102
  variable naming 211                             Rhino.Mocks.Dll 102
readable test 11, 18, 25, 33, 67, 156, 188,       single parameter method 121
     190, 203                                     smart stubs 110
  best practices 209                              stub object properties 111
real object 90                                  roles 259
real test 159                                   Rollback attribute 277
real-world scenarios 45
                                                Ruby 265, 279
record-and-replay model 102, 104, 126, 269
  difference with arrange-act-assert            runtime 98–99, 102, 249
       model 128
recording stage 122                             S
redefine class 249                              safe green zone 147, 169, 180
Red-Green-Refactor 33                           Scrum 226
Refactor from DevExpress 165                    sealed classes 78
refactored test 176                             seam 58, 67–68, 70–71, 74, 80
refactoring 17–18, 55, 87, 95, 132, 150, 152,     target layer 70
     154, 165, 168, 173, 177, 180, 186, 190,      See also seams
     200, 208, 239, 244, 250                    seams 55, 68, 74, 240, 257, 260, 263
  automated tools 134                             creating 58
  definition 19, 55                               definition 55
  maintainable state 186                          hiding 69
  over-refactoring 190                            multiple 259
  Vise 250–251                                    seam 67–68, 70
refactoring pattern                               seam statements 69
  extracting an interface 55                    security 260, 264



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                          INDEX       293




selection strategy 242                       Spring.NET 62, 261, 274, 276
Selenium 278, 280–281                        SRP See single responsibility principle
semantics 174, 264                           state sharing 36
   changes 175, 185                          state verification See state-based testing
   See also test semantics                   state-based testing 40, 82–83, 137
SetUp 35, 45, 49, 187                           comparison with interaction testing 83
   See also NUnit                               definition 40
setup action 34                                 result-driven testing 83
setup code 151                                  when to use 84
setup method 152, 154, 156–157, 162, 170,    static languages 266
     186, 189, 196, 198, 273                 static method 183, 258, 260
   best practices 190                        static state 198
   initializing objects 189–190              statics 67, 258
   maintainable 190                          StoryTeller 283
   wrong use 188                             strict mocks 106
   See also setup action                        failure 106
shared class 188                                StrictMock method 107
shared factory method 186                    structured test 16, 22, 24
shared resources 196, 198                    StructureMap 62, 261, 274–275
shared-state corruption 192                  stub 54, 58, 66
   causes 197                                   asserts 85
   maintainability 197                          combining with mock object 89
   manifestation 196                            definition 50
   problems 197                                 difference with mock object 84
   solutions 198                                getting before method call 55, 66
   test subsets 197                             injecting stub implementation 55, 58
Simian 246, 254                                 injection 80
   download 254                                 receiving before method call 58
similar tests 177                               setters 94
simple objects 49                               stub analyzer 60
simple unit test 12, 27                         stub extension manager 57
single asserts 200                              stub injection 58
single responsibility principle 262, 264        stub manager 57
single unit 9                                   stub method 71
singletons 198, 258, 261                        stub object 61
slow tests 39                                stub chains 95
slow-running test 144                        stub class 57, 61, 72
Smalltalk 4, 265                                configurability 57
smart factories See inversion of control        StubExtensionManager 53
smart stubs 110                                 See also stub
software 236, 256                            stub loggers 167
Software Assessments, Benchmarks, and Best   stub method 71
     Practices 231                           stub object 71
software development 4, 23                      See also stub
software module 8                            stubbing See faking
Software QA Quarterly, The 227               StubLogger 152
SOLID 78, 237, 267                           stubs 49, 82, 87, 102, 108, 124, 136, 269
Solution Explorer 128                           combining with mocks 97
source control 142, 144, 147                    difference with mocks objects 97



                 Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
294     INDEX




stubs (continued)                          test class 27–28, 30, 36, 43–44, 103,
  dynamic stubs 99                              148–149, 154, 164
  fake values 110                            test class hierarchy 170
  how many per test 94                       See also class
  preference over mock objects 209         test class inheritance 151
subclass 164                                 abstract test driver class 151
subteam 222                                  abstract test infrastructure class 151
superclass 165                               template test class 151
swap approach 249                          test class patterns 148–149
swap class 249                               one-test-class-per-class pattern 149
system initialization methods 167            one-test-class-per-feature pattern 150
system state 167                           test code 30, 210
system test 144                              semantics 74
system testing 168                         test code coverage 227
system under test See unit testing           code coverage tools 227
                                             sample report 234
T                                          test code coverage report 225
T generic type 167                         test complexity 178
target server 143                          test conditions 29
tasks 144                                  test constructors 36
TDD 17–18, 227, 235, 257                   test design 16, 18, 237
  See also test-driven development           guidelines 257
team formation 222                           interface-based design 258
team support 230                             object-oriented 266
Team System tools 281                      test destructors 36
Team System UI Tests 280–281               test development
Team System Web Test 278                     time consumed 242
TeamCity 143                               test feasibility table 240
TearDown 35, 45, 49                        test fragility 178, 205
  See also NUnit                           test frameworks 268, 271
teardown action 34                         test hierarchies 141
teardown code 151                          test isolation 182, 191, 198
teardown method 196, 198, 273                flow testing 193
  See also teardown action                   importance 193
technical definition 5                       laziness 193
techniques 268                               multiple asserts 200
template test class pattern 158              test design 193
test actions 30                            test layers
test API 150                                 advantages 70
test assembly 146                            disadvantages 70
test assertion 30, 38, 43                  test loading 29
  assert class 24                          test logic 41, 178
  assert message 24, 31                    test mapping 148
  assert method 24                         test method 13, 27–28, 30, 40, 44, 57, 159,
test blockage 191                               164–165
test bug 173, 178                            expected behavior 29
  debugging 174                              method name 29
  fixing 174                                 multiple 150
test categories 39                         test name 210



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                                                                               INDEX        295




test naming 18, 28, 33, 179                     threads 50
  naming conventions 28                         three pillars 172
test order 192                                  threshold of logic 241
test output 205                                 Timeout 272
test pass 18                                    TOOD See testable object-oriented design
test path 242                                   tooling 239
test pattern names 50                           tools 268
test project 44, 145, 149                       top-down change 223–224
test quality 177                                ToString() 203
test result 40                                  traditional coding See traditional develop-
test review 172, 191, 221                            ment
test run 32, 34, 36, 67, 252                    traditional development 18
test runner 14, 24, 199                         TransactionScope 277–278
  test results 24                               triggers 144
test semantics 173, 184                         trustworthiness 171, 215
Test Spy 88                                     trustworthy test 172, 180
test state 36, 196–197                             definition 171
test stubs 44                                      guidelines 172
test subsets 193, 195                           try-catch 199, 202
test suite 252                                  Typemock 100, 126, 128–129, 137, 237, 244,
testability 45, 53, 55–56, 78, 150, 244, 247,        246, 248, 260, 266, 279
     256–257, 263, 270, 273                        expectations 132
  alternatives 265                              Typemock code
  complexity 264                                   download 254
  designing code 238                            Typemock Isolator 97, 269
  problems 248                                     See also Typemock
testable design 78, 81, 256–257, 262–263        Typemock Racer 246, 254, 281–282
  properties 256
testable object-oriented design (TOOD) 78,      U
     81                                         UI testing 268, 280–281
testable system 257                             UIAutomation API 281
test-code coverage report 226                   UIs 280
test-driven development 3, 16–18, 33, 182,      unit test 3, 6, 11, 23, 45, 126, 141, 169
     219, 225, 236, 257                           actions 30
  incremental 17                                  automation 10, 24
  style choice 237                                core techniques 138
  technique 18                                    ease of development 11
Test-Driven Development in Microsoft .NET 237     ease of running 180
test-driven development techniques 239            fast tests 39
test-first 16                                     fast-running tests 145
TestFixtureSetUp 36                               final definition 11
TestFixtureTearDown 36                            frameworks 22
testing guidance 151, 159                         good unit test 5–6, 9–11
testing project 29                                human factor 146
test-inhibiting design 51                         initial state 34
third-party tools 25                              lifecycle 34
Thomas, Dave 151                                  multiple tests 57
threading problems 254                            properties of a good unit test 6
thread-related testing 268, 281                   quickness 10



                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
296     INDEX




unit test (continued)                          NUnit 201
  removing 173                               versioning info 159
  running a test 24                          view class 122
  setup methods 34                           virtual by default 258
  slow tests 39                              virtual method 71–72, 75, 96, 134, 258–260,
  status 24                                       267
  test placement 141                         virtualizing 76
  tools 44                                   Vise 246, 250–251
  unit 4                                     Visual Build Pro 143
unit testing 4–5, 83                         Visual Studio 79, 128, 134, 149, 165, 253,
  classic definition 4                            271
  coding 233                                 Visual Studio .NET 22, 272
  designing for testability 266
                                             Visual Studio 2008 26
  effect on release date 232
                                             Visual Studio Team Foundation Server 143
  GUI 6
  implementation 230, 232–233, 238           Visual Studio Team System 271, 281–282
  metrics 234–235                            Visual Studio Team System Test
  overall time reduction 233                      Edition 180
  system under test (SUT) 4                  Visual Studio Team Test 279
  time added 231                             VS.NET 253
  time consumed 232
  tough questions 231                        W
unit-testing framework 11, 22–24, 145, 268   WatiN 278–279, 281
  attributes 24                              Watir 278–279
  base classes 24                            web service 49, 61, 74, 83, 87, 89–90, 113,
  benefits 22                                    129, 257
  interfaces 24                                MockWebService 87
  list 24                                      stub 90
  xUnit framework 25                         web testing 268, 278
unit-testing technique 18, 243–244           whiteboards 225
Unity 274–275                                Wiegers, Karl 227
  See also Microsoft Unity                   wiki page 252
Unix 22                                      Win32 281
unreadable test 177                          WinForm 281
user interface (UI) 5
                                             Working Effectively with Legacy Code 10, 55, 73,
utility class 150, 167, 241
                                                 96, 183, 253
utility method 141, 150, 167, 176, 183
                                             WPF 281
                                             wrapper classes 96
V
valid test 175
validation check 41                          X
value to the project 241                     xUnit 25, 271, 273
variable naming                              xUnit framework 25
  importance 211                             xUnit Test Patterns 50, 88, 149, 205
VB.NET 124, 236, 260
verbosity 201                                Y
  MbUnit 201                                 YUnit 271




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
                          Test Review Guidelines
     A more elaborate and always up-to-date version of these guidelines can be found at
               http://www.artofunittesting.com/Test_Review_Guidelines




                              Reviewing General Tests
              · Make sure the test does not contain logic or dynamic values 178
                        · Make sure the test tests one thing only 179
             · Make sure that unit tests are separated from integration tests 180
                       · Check coverage by playing with values 180
            · Make sure that testing private or protected methods is not the norm
                               (public is always better) 182
            · Make sure there is little to no duplication of code in the tests 184
            · Make sure setup and teardown methods are not abused 188, 214
               · Make sure tests are completely isolated and repeatable 191
                  · Make sure that most tests only have one assert 198
                      · Make sure tests are not over-specified 205
                    · Check for good naming conventions 210-211
              · Make sure that only meaningful assert messages are used 212
                   · Make sure asserts are separated from actions 214
                           Reviewing Mocks and Stubs
    · Make sure that state-based testing is preferred and used over interaction testing 83
                · Make sure strict mocks are used as little as possible 106
                      · Make sure there is only one mock per test 94
· Make sure the test calls “Verify” or assert on one mock and not on all fake objects in the test
                     (or it might be testing more than one thing) 123
· Make sure that only in rare cases a stub is also a mock at the same time in the same test 84




                Licensed to Abraham Rosner <arosner@rosnertech.com>
.NET PROGRAMMING


            the art of UNIT TESTING
                           Roy Osherove                                           SEE INSERT

                    Foreword by Michael Feathers


U
    nit testing, done right, can mean the difference between a
    failed project and a successful one, between a maintainable        “An important book that should
    code base and a code base that no one dares touch, and              have been written years ago.”
between getting home at 2 AM or getting home in time for                —From the Foreword by
dinner, even before a release deadline.                                  Michael Feathers, Object Mentor

The Art of Unit Testing builds on top of what’s already been
                                                                       “Every book on unit testing ever
written about this important topic. It guides you step by step
                                                                        written has been for amateurs.
from simple tests to tests that are maintainable, readable, and
                                                                        This is one is for professionals.”
trustworthy. It covers advanced subjects like mocks, stubs, and
                                                                        —Josh Cronemeyer
frameworks such as Typemock Isolator and Rhino Mocks.
                                                                         ThoughtWorks
And you’ll learn about advanced test patterns and organization,
working with legacy code and even untestable code. The book            “Serious about software
discusses tools you need when testing databases and other               craftsmanship? This book is a
technologies. It’s written for .NET developers but others will          must-have for everyone who is.”
also benefit from this book.                                            —Dave Nicolette
                                                                         Independent Agile Coach
What’s Inside
    How to create readable, maintainable, trustworthy tests            “State of the art!”
    Stubs, mock objects, and automated frameworks                       —Gabor Paller, OnRelay Ltd
    Working with .NET tools, including
    NUnit, Rhino Mocks and Typemock Isolator                           “A thorough, incremental
                                                                        introduction and... ideas for
                The chief architect at Typemock, Roy Osherove is        refining [your] technique.”
                one of the original ALT.NET organizers. He consults     —Kent Beck
                and trains teams worldwide on the gentle art of unit     Three Rivers Institute
                testing and test-driven development. He frequently
                speaks at international conferences such as TechEd
                and JAOO. Roy’s blog is at ISerializable.com.


For online access to the author, code samples, and a free ebook for
owners of this book, go to www.manning.com/TheArtofUnitTesting                ISBN 13: 978-1-933988-27-6
                                                                              ISBN 10: 1-933988-27-4
                                                                                                   53999

                                   123

                                                                             9 781933 988276
         MANNING              $39.99 / Can $49.99 [INCLUDING eBOOK]
